[Amit Varma]: What makes for a good Indian? What are the duties of a good citizen? We know that the
[Amit Varma]: relationship between the state and society is dysfunctional, but can it be repaired by
[Amit Varma]: the actions of committed civilians? Can we rise out of our apathy and make our democracy
[Amit Varma]: meaningful? We already have a democracy that is of the people and for the people, but can
[Amit Varma]: it also be by the people?
[Unknown]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen. For many months now, I've been wanting to get Ashwin
[Amit Varma]: Mahesh on the show. Ashwin is a polymath thinker who is an expert on various areas of policy
[Amit Varma]: such as urban governance, and he's also a civic activist who has participated in politics.
[Amit Varma]: He was one of the catalysts of the India Against Corruption movement almost a decade ago when
[Amit Varma]: he was part of J.P. Narayan's Lok Satta movement. He is today in the Aam Aadmi Party and I first
[Amit Varma]: met him a couple of years ago at a farmer's meeting in Deolali, where I also interviewed
[Amit Varma]: the Shetkari Sangatana leader Gunwant Patil for what became episode 86 of the Scene and
[Amit Varma]: the Unseen, my only Hindi episode so far. I had long conversations with Ashwin at Deolali
[Amit Varma]: and was blown away by the depth of his thinking and the range of his insights. When I invited
[Amit Varma]: him to appear on the show, among the topics I had in mind were the India Against Corruption
[Amit Varma]: movement as well as urban governance in general. Ashwin then suggested that we speak about
[Amit Varma]: participatory democracy, or what he called government by the people. We recorded on January
[Amit Varma]: 24, 2020, and had a wide-ranging conversation that covered IAC, urban governance, what makes
[Amit Varma]: a good Indian, the evolution of the Aam Aadmi Party, and many, many other subjects. This
[Amit Varma]: was one of my most thought-provoking conversations, partly because it ranged over so many subjects
[Amit Varma]: that even finding a title for this episode became difficult. I hope you'll enjoy it as
[Amit Varma]: much as I did. But before we get to the episode, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you're listening to the Scene and the Unseen, it means you like listening to audio and you're
[Amit Varma]: thirsty for knowledge. That being the case, I'd urge you to check out Storytel, the sponsors
[Amit Varma]: of this episode. Storytel is an audiobook platform that has a massive range of audiobooks
[Amit Varma]: from around the world. Their international collection is stellar, but so is a local collection.
[Amit Varma]: They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audiobooks. What's more, I do a weekly
[Amit Varma]: podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I talk about one book every
[Amit Varma]: week, giving context, giving you a taste of it, and so on. Download that app and listen
[Amit Varma]: to my show. And as long as Storytel sponsors this show within this commercial itself, I
[Amit Varma]: will recommend an audiobook that I liked on that platform every week. My recommendation
[Amit Varma]: for this week is iRobot by Isaac Asimov, a science fiction masterpiece that has been
[Amit Varma]: the gateway drug for many, many people into the world of sci-fi and even literature. iRobot
[Amit Varma]: by Isaac Asimov on Storytel. Download their app or visit Storytel.com. Remember, Storytel
[Amit Varma]: with a single L. Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwin, welcome to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Guest]: My pleasure. Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwin, tell me a little bit about your background because for someone who has both dabbled with
[Amit Varma]: politics and worked very hard in governance in recent years, you were trained for none
[Guest]: of these things.
[Guest]: Well, I don't think you need to be trained for these things to participate in them. But
[Guest]: you're right. I wanted to be a physicist and an astronomer when I was young. And I guess
[Guest]: I was fortunate enough to go on to become something that I wanted to be when I was young,
[Guest]: which is always a nice thing. But once I actually became an astronomer, it sort of dawned on
[Guest]: me that a lot of things that excited me were about observational astronomy. But many of
[Guest]: the programs that I sort of looked at for learning were more about astrophysics rather
[Guest]: than observational astronomy. And so I started thinking about what else I could do. And I
[Guest]: became interested in clouds and climate change.
[Guest]: In the 90s in particular, all this stuff about sustainability and climate change was beginning
[Guest]: to come to the notice of a lot of people. And so I said I would study climate change.
[Guest]: And in particular, I said I would study clouds and their impact on climate change. But I
[Guest]: also said I would study clouds in Antarctica and in the Arctic, polar clouds broadly, because
[Guest]: polar clouds have, in fact, potentially a much higher impact on climate change than
[Guest]: clouds anywhere else. And until the 1990s, many climate models did not even include data
[Guest]: from above 60 North and below 60 South. So a lot of the data for climate modeling was
[Guest]: still being collected. And I was fortunate enough to go to one of those programs for
[Guest]: my doctoral work. And I spent 10 or 12 years looking at Antarctic clouds and Arctic clouds,
[Guest]: first from the ground and then from satellites at NASA. It was very much a lot of fun. I
[Guest]: sometimes miss that, and people ask me about that. But at some point, I just said I'm going
[Guest]: home. And a lot of people will say, why are you going home, leaving a job like this? I
[Guest]: can only say that if I'd gone to Calcutta and come back, nobody would say, why are you
[Guest]: going home? Or if I'd gone to Delhi and come back, nobody would say that. I suppose people
[Guest]: think that if you go to Washington, you're less likely to come home. But anyway, having
[Guest]: made that decision, I came back. And there weren't any Antarctic clouds to study here.
[Guest]: So I had to find something else to do. A few people that I spoke to at that time, I'd already
[Guest]: begun to be interested in public interest media and communication by then. And by talking
[Guest]: to a few people, I got the sense that one of the things I could look at was how cities
[Guest]: are shaping up in India. Urbanization is a big part of what is going on in the country.
[Guest]: And it's not really well-guided even today. And so I began to look at that and see what
[Guest]: is it that I could contribute as a person not coming from the right quote-unquote background
[Guest]: for this. And it occurred to me that one thing I could do was help visualize the city better.
[Guest]: A lot of problems that we try to solve, we're trying to solve them without actually being
[Guest]: able to see the problem. People will talk about bad traffic and poor water supply and
[Guest]: lack of housing and all that. But if you ask them to give a spatial description of those
[Guest]: problems, not a lot of people know this, even in the agencies that are tasked with solving
[Guest]: them. So I said, let's start to put together these visualizations of cities and bring together
[Guest]: related things. There are two reasons to do that. One is to enable understanding through
[Guest]: visualization. The second is to enable just integration. All the departments work in silos.
[Guest]: So the bus company has its data. Metro has its data. Everybody has their own data. They
[Guest]: don't really work together. So to be able to pull them, whereas as a citizen, what you
[Guest]: care about is mobility in the city. You don't really care about these silos. So could you
[Guest]: bring them together becomes the question. And I said, that's another reason to start
[Guest]: working on visualizations as well. And that's what I started doing. And from there, all
[Guest]: sorts of things began to happen in urban governance.
[Amit Varma]: And is there therefore taking off from that a case to be made that interdisciplinary pollination
[Amit Varma]: is very important for good decision making? Because part of the reason I guess you were
[Amit Varma]: able to think of cities in this way that let's visualize especially is because of your prior
[Amit Varma]: training and experience in completely unrelated fields. Is that something that you think is
[Amit Varma]: important and is a homogenization of whatever experience or training that people traditionally
[Amit Varma]: bring into these fields a problem?
[Guest]: I'm not sure, but certainly there are multiple axes on which you need to look at the problem.
[Guest]: I always say that working with your municipal corporation is harder than working at NASA
[Guest]: for a variety of reasons. But there are four axes on which you need to look for intersections.
[Guest]: One is topical across many topics. What can you bring together? The second is scale. How
[Guest]: do you think of the city at one scale? How do you think of neighborhoods at one scale?
[Guest]: You know, streets and blocks and all of that. That's the second axis. The third axis is
[Guest]: stakeholder. Typically, Sarkar has its way of imagining the city. The citizens have their
[Guest]: way of knowing their neighborhoods and imagining the city. And businesses have a different
[Guest]: way of imagining the city. But the city actually is at the intersection of all of these things.
[Guest]: It's both complementary and supplementary intersections of all of these things. So that's
[Guest]: the third axis. And the fourth is learning from each other. What have other cities done
[Guest]: in similar situations? And so if we learn from these four axes simultaneously, then
[Guest]: anyone can do it. It's not so much about interdisciplinarity as it is about the intersections of these
[Amit Varma]: four axes.
[Amit Varma]: So it's more what you focus on than what you have been trained to focus on.
[Guest]: Correct. You work backwards from the problem, right? You don't work forwards alone. Because
[Guest]: when you do this forwards alone, you end up with this Sarkar way of doing things. Sarkar
[Guest]: does a lot of inputs. You go to any government department and say, this should be done. And
[Guest]: inevitably, a lot of them will tell you it's happening, it's being done. And that may even
[Guest]: be true. But if you look at how fast it's being done, you're not going to get a good
[Guest]: sense that it can ever get done well enough or quickly enough to solve the problem that's
[Guest]: being described. So it's much better to work backwards from the problem, right? It's much
[Guest]: better to say there's a housing deficit. How big is the housing deficit? How are you going
[Guest]: to fix that deficit? Rather than saying it's the responsibility of the development authority
[Guest]: to create housing. How do we create housing? How much housing do we create? So these are
[Guest]: very different approaches to public problem solving. And public problem solving is a sort
[Guest]: of a complex thing. I described this. A public problem is something about which everyone
[Guest]: agrees that something should be done. But the minute you propose something, one set
[Guest]: of people say, this is not the thing that should be done. Right? So you've got to work
[Guest]: through that a lot. And that's why it's important to keep your eyes on the problem and work
[Amit Varma]: backwards from that. Right. And, you know, later in the episode, in the second half of
[Amit Varma]: the episode, you know, I have a lot else to ask you about urban governance and cities
[Amit Varma]: and traffic and so on areas that you're deeply insightful in. But to just sort of go back
[Amit Varma]: to biography for a moment, I'm also very interested in what kind of books you read as a young
[Amit Varma]: person. Like what were the formative influences on you? Who were your intellectual heroes
[Amit Varma]: growing up and as a young adult?
[Guest]: Well, I was fascinated by polymaths. You know, I like people like Da Vinci, Russell, Aristotle.
[Guest]: You sort of have this notion that people become successful in one thing. But there are also
[Guest]: these exceptional people who did many things in life and did them all well. It's not like
[Guest]: they were primarily one thing and did a few other things. Everything that did, they did
[Guest]: really well. And I kind of found that fascinating. So I started thinking about how do you do
[Guest]: many things, right? Like I was talking in a school a few days ago and said, a lot of
[Guest]: young people are asked, what do you want to be when you grow up? The implication is that
[Guest]: there's one answer to that question. I think you should ask, what all do you want to be
[Guest]: when you grow up? And then you would get a very different set of answers. But by and
[Guest]: large, you know, I'm not that different in terms of what I read or saw. I read the newspaper,
[Guest]: of course, like all kids. I read comics and novels that interest young children. But I
[Guest]: also read a lot of stuff that was just information gathering and knowledge development. And at
[Guest]: some point, I made it a deliberate thing to say that every day I'm going to read a few
[Guest]: minutes at least of stuff that informs and educates me. I've got this whole rhythm for
[Guest]: living, which I think contributes to a learning environment automatically. And it's something
[Guest]: I even tell a lot of young people about. It's called the seven four-letter words of living
[Guest]: well. We can talk about that later if you want.
[Amit Varma]: But let's talk about it now because I'm very curious to sort of reform my working habits.
[Guest]: So I, over the years, more empirically than more by incidental discovery, rather than
[Guest]: as a theory, I've come up with seven four-letter words that if you live like this, you can
[Guest]: be very successful and very happy and live a very sort of enriching life, which sort
[Guest]: of achieves some things too. And you only need to do this for 10 minutes a day. And
[Guest]: you can do any one of them for 10 minutes a day. So it's actually very easy.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to do all seven.
[Guest]: No, no. You can do any one of them for 10 minutes a day. So in all seven, there's a
[Guest]: catch and then there's an overall catch. Okay. So the first one is make. You have to make
[Guest]: something yourself. You have to make it with your hands. You can make even a computer program.
[Guest]: It doesn't have to be a physical object, but you have to make it.
[Guest]: Can you write something? Is that allowed?
[Guest]: Yeah. You, whatever you do. I suppose sort of everyone's looking for the thing that they
[Guest]: can do really well, maybe. But yeah, it can be anything. It can be a chair. It can be
[Guest]: a pot. It can be a computer program. It can be an article that you're writing. All of
[Guest]: this is okay, but you have to do it yourself. The second one is meet, right? Meet essentially
[Guest]: means meet people, but there's a catch. Again, like I said, all seven things have a catch.
[Guest]: In meet, the catch is only strangers count. People that you know don't count. And it's
[Guest]: even better if you're making a deliberate effort to meet them rather than saying I incidentally
[Guest]: met these people. And the reason this helps is that strangers broaden your perspective
[Guest]: of things. They have vantage points that are different from yours. So that's the second
[Guest]: one. The third one is read, right? And you asked about reading earlier. So it's one of
[Guest]: the habits. Comics don't count. Even newspapers don't count for me anymore. Only things that
[Guest]: inform and educate you count. You can decide what informs and educates you and how you're
[Guest]: going to pursue a strategy of reading and learning within that framework. So that's
[Guest]: the third one, read. And keep in mind, 10 minutes is enough. Any one of this is enough.
[Guest]: I don't recommend that you do only one of them all the time. That reading all the time
[Guest]: doesn't make any sense. But at least three or four, you must do.
[Guest]: The fourth one is kind of like a guy's thing because it's cook. And what I really mean
[Guest]: by cook is do something that you think is normally someone else's job. You think it's
[Guest]: mom's job, it's the wife's job, somebody. But really all I'm doing is using it as a
[Guest]: metaphor for saying, do something that I normally think is not my job, but somebody else's job.
[Guest]: So you get into someone else's skin and that builds empathy and so on.
[Guest]: Sort of. No, no. I'm not trying to do it for a reason. I'm just saying, if you did this,
[Guest]: all sorts of things would happen as a result of it. And it could be anything else. If you
[Guest]: already anyway cook, find something else that is stuff that you'd normally expect somebody
[Guest]: else to do. Maybe you can mop the house. I don't know what it is, but you can figure
[Guest]: out something that isn't your job normally. The fifth one is play. Playing solitaire on
[Guest]: your computer doesn't count. I really mean team sports. I suppose doubles in table tennis
[Guest]: or tennis is all right, but ideally team sports. Playing online chess doesn't count. No, no.
[Guest]: Contact sports is better than sort of non-contact sports. And play is easier for kids, especially
[Guest]: because they're in school, they play. So when I tell this in schools, I change it a little
[Guest]: bit. Play, but not with someone in your school or someone in your community. Find a way of
[Guest]: playing with somebody who you don't normally come into contact with. So it's a little bit
[Guest]: of nuance for certain groups. How many have we done? Five. Okay. Then the sixth one is
[Guest]: vote. And by vote, I don't really mean go and press a button on election day, although
[Guest]: you could do that too. I really mean vote as a way of supporting other people. To be
[Guest]: able to stand up and say, I support this, this thing that someone is doing or this person
[Guest]: in some way. And I think it's important because it helps us to celebrate other people. It
[Guest]: helps us to take a stand, stand on what it is that we care about. It clarifies our own
[Guest]: thinking to ourselves, all of that stuff. So vote is the sixth one. What did I go through?
[Amit Varma]: We've done make, meet, read, cook, play, vote.
[Guest]: Give is the last one, right? And again, give doesn't mean give something to your sister
[Guest]: or your cousin, not to your friends. You have to give to someone in need, right? It can
[Guest]: be anything. You can give them money. If you have money, you can give them a little of
[Guest]: your time. You can volunteer. You can do whatever it is. You have to give. The thing that you
[Guest]: give must be yours to give. So you can't give other people's stuff away and that doesn't
[Guest]: count. And it must genuinely be to someone who needs it, not just wants it or would like
[Guest]: to have it. So these are the seven things. And there's another catch. You can't miss
[Guest]: a day, right? And that's a very important catch. If you miss a day, it's as bad as missing
[Guest]: a year, right? And it takes a while to realize that missing a day is as bad as missing a
[Guest]: year because a lot of people say, how can missing a day be as bad as missing a year?
[Guest]: It's because, I mean, you can miss for health reasons and stuff like that. I don't think
[Guest]: that I wouldn't begrudge myself that. But if I miss because I'm not doing it, then it's
[Guest]: not me. So I would say, then I'm going to start again and be more deliberate about it.
[Guest]: The idea in my mind was to get this to a point where I can be sure I'm doing one or more
[Guest]: of these every day for a few minutes without needing to think about it. I'm pretty sure
[Guest]: I'll do at least two or three of this every day for 10 minutes. And the reason I'm sure
[Guest]: of that is that there's a rhythm of how you live, which incidentally makes time for one
[Guest]: or more of these things. So, and I've said this to a lot of young people. I've said this
[Guest]: to a few others in schools and colleges and even some older people and encourage some
[Guest]: of them to try it. A lot of people have come back and said, you know what, it really works.
[Guest]: And I don't know why it works to tell you the truth. I'm not a sort of a theorist about
[Guest]: these things. I think it works because it broadens your mind. It brings you in contact
[Guest]: with a lot of different people. It sort of gets you out of your comfort zone in the ways
[Guest]: in which you would approach things. And it builds rhythm. I think rhythm is the biggest
[Guest]: thing that you can build.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's fantastic. I'll take some time to process this. As you went through the list,
[Amit Varma]: I thought, okay, the one thing that's a problem for me here is play contact sports, because
[Amit Varma]: I'm kind of a solitary person and don't go out much to meet people. And I can easily,
[Amit Varma]: you know, read every day. I mean, I do read every day, but I set myself the sort of my
[Amit Varma]: personal target is like 20 books a month at least. So I do end up doing that. So I could
[Amit Varma]: easily cheat by saying I read every day, I haven't missed a single day. But I guess one
[Guest]: has to, you know, do all seven of them in a particular way.
[Guest]: I think it's possible that at different stages in your life, you can't do all seven. I think
[Guest]: we have to accept that. But I'm saying this works well. And there have been times when
[Guest]: I'll go long periods without doing one or the other. But the key is to get to a point
[Guest]: where you're doing at least one of them every day. And there's some diversity within that,
[Guest]: so that you're not doing the same thing or the same two things. But, you know, you can
[Guest]: do five of them. Each week, if you do five of them, you're pretty much there. It doesn't
[Guest]: have to be all seven. It's nice if it's all seven, because some of them do require a stretch
[Guest]: at some level. But five is not bad.
[Amit Varma]: Great food for thought. And I would recommend you write a self-help book at some point,
[Amit Varma]: except that I think there are other books the nation needs you to write before that.
[Guest]: I've been writing a book for almost six years now. And maybe that's a good segue, because
[Guest]: it's a segue into a lot of things I do. Well, tentatively, I've called it The Good Indian.
[Guest]: And it's a history of thinking about this phrase, who is a good Indian? And broadly,
[Guest]: in my mind, it's from 1905-1910 to 2005-2010. And you could say it's from Gokhale to Arnab.
[Guest]: And then, therefore, it's from Gandhiji's mentor to Gandhiji's disciple in some way.
[Guest]: And there's a narrative that I've built for this. I mean, I'm still sort of exploring
[Guest]: and developing pieces of it. But broadly, let me put it to you like this. In the early
[Guest]: part of the last century, it was pretty clear who was a good Indian. If you wanted the British
[Guest]: to get out of India, and you were doing something to make that happen, you were a good Indian.
[Amit Varma]: But is that clear in retrospect? Like, at the time, the British would have looked at
[Amit Varma]: it differently?
[Guest]: No, no. I'm saying this is a question if you ask yourself as an Indian.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, today.
[Guest]: Okay. Of course, there are all kinds of views that others can take about it. But I'm saying,
[Guest]: if you, in your own society, in your own family, in your own community, whatever, however you
[Guest]: see it, if you'd ask this question, who's a good Indian? A lot of the answer would have
[Guest]: revolved around the idea of self-rule. And I make a distinction between independence
[Guest]: and self-rule. And we should talk about that as well. I think a lot of the freedom movement
[Guest]: was actually about self-rule rather than liberty and independence. And that has shaped a lot
[Guest]: of our governance since then as well. But to come back to this story, it was very clear.
[Guest]: You fought for self-rule or independence or freedom, and you were a good Indian because
[Guest]: you did that. Then in 1947, the British went away. And so that was not a good enough, that
[Guest]: was not a useful answer to the question, who is a good Indian? So you now needed something
[Guest]: else. And Nehru kind of stepped into that reach, as it were, and gave you a suggestion.
[Guest]: He said, the state will build India. And if you are part of the state building India,
[Guest]: or if you applaud the state building India, you're a good Indian. You can either be in
[Guest]: the services or you respect and applaud Sarkar and the services. And that's what it means
[Guest]: to be a good Indian, that this tryst with destiny, in his mind was really Sarkar's tryst
[Guest]: with destiny. I don't think he ever saw it as the society's tryst with destiny or even
[Guest]: industry's tryst with destiny. And so we went on with that for, I'm going to say, 20 years
[Guest]: or so. And without connecting it too much to the emergency question itself, what happened
[Guest]: by the late 70s, mid to late 70s, early 80s, is that a lot of people began to say, very
[Guest]: good, the state is developing India. But in the meantime, you haven't been delivering
[Guest]: our needs, you haven't been delivering the essentials of a development framework. Can
[Guest]: you please deliver that? And then get on with your job of building India, even if you feel
[Guest]: that the country should be state-led. And by Indira Gandhi's time, the notion that the
[Guest]: country should be state-led had taken even stronger form with nationalization and a bunch
[Guest]: of other things. And so when this question came up, there was a kind of a fudgy answer
[Guest]: to it. And the fudgy answer was, state is not malevolent. It still means to do good.
[Guest]: It's still the appropriate vehicle for leading development in India, but it's simply overburdened
[Guest]: and it lacks the capacity to deliver all these good things. And therefore, we need an intermediate
[Guest]: class to deliver those good things. And that class was the NGO. So you had this massive
[Guest]: upsurge of civic, civil society and community action through non-governmental organizations,
[Guest]: many of whom are loosely sort of allied to someone or the other in the state space as
[Guest]: well. But they began to see themselves as intermediaries. The state can't do everything.
[Guest]: So on behalf of the state, we'll do a bunch of things for you. And this sort of came to
[Guest]: a culmination, if you will, I'm going to say in UPA too, probably, with the National Advisory
[Guest]: Council itself being dominated by civil society members to the point that it was effectively
[Guest]: a supracabinet of sorts. And I have many friends who were on it, so I know what I'm saying
[Guest]: about this. And you could see that as a good thing or a bad thing, but it was basically
[Guest]: a different kind of intermediation and representation that brought people there. The typical NGO,
[Guest]: however, had a certain kind of intermediation that was going on. The country was historically
[Guest]: very rural. NGOs tended by and large to be urban or the NGO leaders tended to be by and
[Guest]: large urban. And that was kind of an interesting thing as well. And you can look at even, oh,
[Guest]: I don't know, an MKSS might be a good example of something that was kind of clearly starting
[Guest]: from rural deprivation, rural misgovernance, and articulating ideas about how information,
[Guest]: employment and all of these things should be better delivered and protected in rural
[Guest]: settings. But a lot of the leadership for that, the spokesmanship for that is urban.
[Guest]: I'm sure you can find more examples of that. In the NGO sector, there was a lot of that.
[Guest]: Urban representation of rural poverty alleviation. But after a while, I think that... And so
[Guest]: if you were in the NGO sector, if you were in civil society, if you were enabling this
[Guest]: development outcome as a partner of the state, not as an opponent of this, but as a partner
[Guest]: of... Then you were a good Indian, right? So it's a widening class of good Indians.
[Guest]: Initially you were a good Indian if you were in the state or applauding the state. Now
[Guest]: if you're in the state, applauding the state, or with the state, you're a good Indian. But
[Guest]: then what happened? Urbanization started to pick up in a massive way. And after a while,
[Guest]: it became clear, even to end beneficiaries and citizens, that really there's an element
[Guest]: of geographical separation, which is the reason they need intermediation. Without the geographical
[Guest]: separation, they can directly approach the powers, the corridors of power. And in places
[Guest]: like Delhi or Bangalore, this is quite obvious. I can see Vidhan Sardar from my house, right?
[Guest]: Not I personally, but for those who can see Vidhan Sardar from their house, the notion
[Guest]: that they need intermediation from anybody, or I can see my corporation office, or I can
[Guest]: see whatever. There's a lot of the Sarkar that is visible from where I live. So urbanization
[Guest]: made people feel proximate enough to the Sarkar to start thinking they did not need intermediation.
[Guest]: And this is where the idea of decentralization and loosely, a poorly understood idea of Swaraj
[Guest]: began to sort of appear on the street, in terms of a demand to be included in governance
[Guest]: rather than merely represented in government. It was not so much representative democracy
[Guest]: anymore that people wanted. They said, I want to participate in this process myself. I don't
[Guest]: want intermediation. And I'm not satisfied with only representation. And it became government
[Guest]: by the people in some way. And if you look at it, by the time India against corruption
[Guest]: happened, that was actually the dominant demand, right? It was vaguely articulated and maybe
[Guest]: even poorly represented by different sets of people saying different things in that
[Guest]: meaning. But the idea was again and again, the same thing. We're tired of you. We're
[Guest]: tired of merely people who we elect, but don't have any subsequent control over. The local
[Guest]: thing was a way of saying one kind of control is to yank you back. But really, that's the
[Guest]: outlier, if you ask me. That's not really the goal of any democratic process. It's sort
[Guest]: of almost a check and balance at best. So the real goal is to be able to say after they
[Guest]: elect somebody, how do I begin to be able to engage with that thing in a much better
[Guest]: way? Or can I have a system in which the guy who gets elected is also a guy who's been
[Guest]: selected in some way in society previously? And this government by the people, Swaraj,
[Guest]: and decentralization as imagined in the 73rd and 74th amendments. So all of those began
[Guest]: to converge in this expectation that today people want to participate directly themselves
[Guest]: in deciding some of the destinies that they encounter through. And now if you are a participant
[Guest]: in that process, you're a good Indian. It doesn't mean there's a thing, and it could
[Guest]: be for any agenda. It could be for an agenda of nationalism. It could be for an agenda
[Guest]: of something else, regionalism, federalism. But ultimately, I think we're coming much
[Guest]: more strongly to the idea that participatory citizenship is what earns the label of good
[Guest]: Indianness. And so I see this as the sweep that has happened over the last 100 years.
[Guest]: And how much it sticks, we'll have to see. But a lot of what we're seeing in politics
[Guest]: now is a demand for inclusion in decision making, is a demand for saying, I'm tired
[Guest]: of other people making all these decisions for me.
[Amit Varma]: That's kind of fascinating. There's a lot to unpack in that. And one of the first things
[Amit Varma]: that strikes me, obviously, is that if I look at this historical sweep, you've described
[Amit Varma]: as especially post-independence from an economic lens, then I am thinking of incentives, that
[Amit Varma]: I'm looking at the incentives of the state, the people who sort of man the state, the
[Amit Varma]: politicians and the bureaucrats and so on, and what their incentives are. And that doesn't
[Amit Varma]: necessarily move towards a national interest. It do for NGOs, who then once they form their
[Amit Varma]: NGOs and start getting funding from wherever they do have different sets of overlapping
[Amit Varma]: incentives, which might divert them from the original purpose like the state itself. And
[Amit Varma]: now you're speaking of participatory democracy. And here, what sort of strikes me is that
[Amit Varma]: I want to ask you about incentives in two contexts. One context is the incentive of
[Amit Varma]: the citizen to participate. Because my sense always as a citizen is, and I'm not saying
[Amit Varma]: my but you know, an individual citizens take would typically be that my one vote doesn't
[Amit Varma]: make a difference. My participation doesn't make a difference. Why should I participate?
[Amit Varma]: And why should I even keep myself informed about things that matter what public choice
[Amit Varma]: is called rational ignorance. And the other set of incentives is that our government simply
[Amit Varma]: isn't local enough, which is, of course, something you've been writing about for many years that
[Amit Varma]: our governments are too centralized. And at the local urban governance level, there is
[Amit Varma]: a massive disconnect between power and accountability. The people who care for my vote don't actually
[Amit Varma]: have the power to change my life, and vice versa. Yes, no, I, I have some experience
[Guest]: with this. And of course, nowadays, people sort of explain it in a certain way. But you
[Guest]: have to sort of keep in mind that when I started to do what I now call public problem solving
[Guest]: on the ground, I was like anybody else, a quote, unquote, nobody, right? The system
[Guest]: doesn't know you, you're, you might be well educated and all of that, the system doesn't
[Guest]: really know you. And that's not a bad beginning, because it's sort of whatever beginning you
[Guest]: make from there, in theory is replicable by a lot of other people. So in my mind, it began
[Guest]: like this. I live in Kepinagar, in Adikeri. And next to my community, apartment community,
[Guest]: there's a lake. I did. And normally, if you bought a house, even a flat, and there was
[Guest]: a lake next to it, the guy selling it would advertise it, saying there's a lot of money
[Guest]: to be made by advertising the lakefront community. But the guy I bought the flat from didn't
[Guest]: even mention it. And once you look at it, you sort of realized why it wasn't really
[Guest]: a lake, it was sort of a sewage pit of some kind, various kinds of things had gathered
[Guest]: in it, sort of had some historical resemblance to a lake. But apart from that, it was nothing
[Guest]: like a lake. And so some people in the neighborhood began to say, let's just clean it. All right,
[Guest]: I'm sure there's somebody in charge of cleaning it, but let's clean it. And so we began to
[Guest]: do that. And along came somebody from the municipality to say, who the hell are you?
[Guest]: And what are you doing? So we said, okay, well, who are you? And he said, I'm the chief
[Guest]: engineer for lakes. So we asked him, what do you do? Clearly, this is a lake, you're
[Guest]: the chief engineer for lakes, so this is the condition of the lake. So it's fair for me
[Guest]: to ask, what do you do? And he sort of immediately was a little bit defensive about that. He
[Guest]: said, you don't understand, we have so many lakes, the budget is so small. You know, there's
[Guest]: like all kinds of things that are obstacles to doing this. But he was also good enough,
[Guest]: his name was Satish, he was a reasonable officer. He sort of was good enough to admit that on
[Guest]: their own, the municipality couldn't really crack this problem. And so I sort of pushed
[Guest]: the municipality to be a little more open-minded about saying, we'll manage the lake. And initially,
[Guest]: the response was a little bit confused. People would say, well, normally people ask to manage
[Guest]: parks and playgrounds. Nobody's actually asked to manage a lake. It's kind of a significant
[Guest]: thing. So that's all right. But you know, you say to yourself, we'll manage what we
[Guest]: can and you do the rest that really requires government level action. Infrastructure spending,
[Guest]: maybe some staffing costs, whatever it is. But by and large, the notion that people could
[Guest]: manage the community spaces, so it began to sort of... And because you see an example
[Guest]: like that and you tell yourself, this addition of people is the addition of capacity. First,
[Guest]: we have to see that the addition of people is the addition of capacity. In India, unfortunately,
[Guest]: we tend to see population as the problem. We tend to count the people without counting
[Guest]: their worth. We think those cities are overcrowded. Overcrowded is great, you have so many people
[Guest]: to do stuff. But most people look at overcrowded and they think, oh my God, there are so many
[Guest]: people for whom I have to do stuff. That's not necessary. But the critical thing that
[Guest]: happened after the Puttanallee Lake revival, and it's a sort of a well-chronicled story
[Guest]: by now, was I was then, by then sort of beginning to do a few things in Sarkar also. So I pushed
[Guest]: BBMP into an MOU-type arrangement between the local community and the municipality to
[Guest]: say that this kind of stewardship of a public space is good. And with certain conditions,
[Guest]: no commercialization. In those days, there'd be no phishing, some various kinds of things.
[Guest]: But those kinds of things, the community, a local group, a local trust in the community
[Guest]: could have stewardship of the lake. And I was also sensible enough to keep myself out
[Guest]: of it, not to get into any conflicts of interest and all of that. But more critically, what
[Guest]: also happened is we took that document, this MOU, and went around to other lake communities,
[Guest]: people who lived near some lake or the other. And so we've got one of these, almost like
[Guest]: a child bragging about chocolate. So I've got one of these, why don't you? Why don't
[Guest]: you go to BBMP and ask them to give you one of these as well? And really from that, the
[Guest]: notion of community-managed public spaces and water bodies in particular began to take
[Guest]: hold. Today, I think there are several dozen lakes in the city which are managed like this,
[Guest]: all under roughly a similar framework. And then United Way got involved in that and pushed
[Guest]: for a dozen or so lakes to be managed in this way. Some local representatives, MLAs in a
[Guest]: few constituencies were more open to this than others. So it began to grow faster in
[Guest]: those areas. And really this model of publicly managed problems, I think of the whole thing
[Guest]: as a public management of the city by the citizens too, and not just the elected representatives
[Guest]: or the officials. And that, in my mind, crystallized in an idea over time, that you don't try to
[Guest]: solve the problem. You try to increase the number of problems solving people. That's
[Guest]: really what I try to do. I, by and large, don't try to solve problems. I don't know
[Guest]: the answer to most things. I'm an astronomer. I used to study clouds in Antarctica. What
[Guest]: the hell do I know about all of these things? It's better to ask the guys who've been studying
[Guest]: these things, how do you solve this problem? And then concentrate on increasing the number
[Guest]: of people who can go do that. Then there's a chance that some of these... If you look
[Guest]: at the city today, what are some things that have worked well? There are lots of things
[Guest]: that people say don't work well in Bangalore. And there's some truth to that. But what are
[Guest]: the things that did work well over the last 10 or 15 years? Some of the police work got
[Guest]: digitized. Some amount of rationalization of bus services happened. Some amount of public
[Guest]: space improvement began. Waste management, voluntarily segregative waste management by
[Guest]: communities began to happen. Here and there, the notion of sustainability took hold in
[Guest]: a few communities. A large part of what happened positively in the last 10 years or so, I would
[Guest]: put that under the bucket of saying, these are things that happened where the role of
[Guest]: society was also significant. Society could be a large number of individuals in volunteer
[Guest]: mode, but it could also be people outside the government in knowledge mode, right? Not
[Guest]: contractors, not vendors, people just bringing knowledge to public problem solving and working
[Guest]: with the government to solve them. And I think that model has legs and merit. When you increase
[Guest]: the number of problem solving people, you also increase the type of problem solving
[Guest]: people that come into the thing. And therefore, your approach to problem solving is strengthened
[Guest]: by that, and you effectively give yourself a higher chance that the problem can be solved.
[Guest]: So this is a model that we try to run again and again. And so, like for example, when
[Guest]: we set up BCLIP, this Bangalore Civic Leadership Intubation Program, which is run here at Takshashilam,
[Guest]: this is again the same idea. You want good corporators, right? Train them before they
[Guest]: contest the election. So every year you train 100 people to contest corporation elections.
[Guest]: And if you do that over five years, you'll have trained 500 people. There are only 200
[Guest]: seats. You'll train two and a half times the number of people to contest the election.
[Guest]: Even if 100 of them or 50 of them contest the election, you suddenly have a cadre of
[Guest]: people who are contesting public representation spaces who have actually been trained in how
[Guest]: the city works, what it does, and so on and so forth. And then you can get them as part
[Guest]: of that course training itself to say, now go do something in your neighborhood. You're
[Guest]: basically seeding and flooding the system with problem-solving people.
[Amit Varma]: I think that's a lovely and very inspiring frame to look at governance and talking of
[Amit Varma]: problem-solving people. And this is a subject I keep banging about as well, that population
[Amit Varma]: is not a problem. People are the ultimate resource and, you know, which you've given
[Amit Varma]: an illustration of. A thought that kind of strikes me is I've always said that in India,
[Amit Varma]: the state has basically failed in everything it is supposed to do, it should do, and therefore
[Amit Varma]: society runs by itself. But mostly society runs by itself in jugaru ways. For example,
[Amit Varma]: if you're not provided with power, you get a generator and you're doing jugar. And the
[Amit Varma]: model that you've pointed out is one where society runs by itself, but almost in partnership
[Amit Varma]: with the state where you go to the state, and like you say, okay, we will manage our
[Amit Varma]: own lake and let's do an MOU and you formalize that arrangement and reduce the scope of the
[Amit Varma]: state and build an element of local governance into this where the people who are affected
[Amit Varma]: by the lake are the people who are looking after it. But my question then is that just
[Amit Varma]: looking at the incentives within government, it would strike me that they would be wary
[Amit Varma]: of such arrangements because it involves giving up power, it involves giving up budgets, because
[Amit Varma]: I guess at some level, the engineer of lakes will one day be told you have all these MOUs,
[Amit Varma]: we can reduce your budgets, you're not doing anything. So how have you dealt with that
[Amit Varma]: sort of pushback, like your sort of civic slash governance activism that you've done?
[Amit Varma]: How did you have to, you know, present your proposals? And what were these interactions
[Guest]: like? How do you win them over to your side?
[Guest]: Well, it is partly political. I don't think you can deny that. I don't. I think it's important
[Guest]: to be political. Because if you were merely civic about it, the risk that you are pointing
[Guest]: to can become quite real and quite large as well. But if you are political about it, this
[Guest]: risk is much more manageable. But you have to say, this is the way I want it, that you're
[Guest]: going to push for it, you're not merely going to advocate for it. And it also requires a
[Guest]: different view of development. A lot of people think of development as something that is
[Guest]: delivered either by good administration, or by some new law, or maybe jobs, whatever kind
[Guest]: of thing. But in my mind, I think of development. Development is a state. It's a state of whatever,
[Guest]: a state of things.
[Amit Varma]: State of development.
[Guest]: It's a state, yeah. It's not a state like in a legal state, but in a state of things.
[Guest]: And that state is a balance between the sarkar, the market, and society. That's development.
[Guest]: It's not what it delivers or what it does. Having that balance is itself development.
[Guest]: That if you don't have that balance, and this is why Nehru's model didn't work, it destroyed
[Guest]: the balance at birth. And therefore, it had no chance of leading to development. Even
[Guest]: today, governments, both in the center and the states, are quite strongly wedded to the
[Guest]: state-led idea. Out of necessity, they may give up a few things. We're not able to run
[Guest]: this company. We're not able to run those banks. We're not able to deliver this outcome
[Guest]: or that outcome. We'll privatize it. We'll regulate it. We'll do something or the other.
[Guest]: But fundamentally, I think we are going to lag behind a very large part of the world
[Guest]: unless we can get to a state of accepting that a peer-to-peer relationship between these
[Guest]: three actors, state, market, and society, is not just a foundation of development. It's
[Guest]: sort of a guarantor, and it's actually itself a kind of development. And therefore, to pursue
[Guest]: that means that as an individual, you're acting in all three arenas. You're acting in your
[Guest]: civic social arena. You're acting in the political governance administrative arena. And you are
[Guest]: acting in the market, industry, commerce arena. That when citizens simultaneously participate
[Guest]: in all these three, it's very difficult to sort of stop development, actually, in that
[Guest]: case.
[Guest]: And I'll give you an example. A lot of people will say, oh, these guys in the municipality
[Guest]: are really awful, and the water board. Yesterday, somebody came and laid the road in front of
[Guest]: my house. And tomorrow, I mean, the day before, somebody came and laid the road in front of
[Guest]: my house. And today, somebody's come to dig it up again. Why can't they coordinate their
[Guest]: work?
[Guest]: And one good question to ask is, you have presented both of these events. What were
[Guest]: you doing? And a lot of people sort of respond to that by saying, what can I do? I'm just
[Guest]: a regular citizen. And in my experience, there are two things that you can do that will stop
[Guest]: this quickly. If you know the engineers in your ward, the ones responsible for water
[Guest]: delivery, sewer treatment, as well as for electricity, roads, and all of that stuff,
[Guest]: it's unlikely that this kind of uncoordinated action would happen. You actually know them.
[Guest]: So in this meet strategy, one of the useful people to go out and meet is your local officials,
[Guest]: for example.
[Guest]: So one is if you know people, you become a kind of coordinator merely by knowing what
[Guest]: they separately and in silos know. So you can avoid some of this. The second thing is
[Guest]: that if you sort of are involved in this way, a demonstration effect emerges from that.
[Guest]: I mean, I live in a neighborhood, which is small, I admit. But in that neighborhood,
[Guest]: there is waste segregation at every doorstep. There's a park, which is maintained by the
[Guest]: local community. There's a playground that is also maintained locally. There's a lakes
[Guest]: public space, which is maintained by the local community. By and large, it's okay. All the
[Guest]: things that one goes out and fights for at the local neighborhood level are achievable
[Guest]: at the local. In fact, we even went one step further. The sewage treatment plant. We built
[Guest]: a sewage treatment plant in the community even before it was required by law. I'm pretty
[Guest]: sure of that.
[Guest]: And then we said, the lake sometimes goes dry. What if we allowed treated water from
[Guest]: the sewage treatment plant to refill the lake? And by working with the pollution control
[Guest]: board, we were able to set a treatment standard at which lake refills would be allowed by
[Guest]: treated sewage water. And that was the first as well. So you suddenly get 4 million liters
[Guest]: of water going into a lake every day. And what it tells me, and then what it ensures
[Guest]: is the lake is always full. It's a nice public space that's open to a lot of people because
[Guest]: it's invitingly full with water.
[Guest]: And if you say, okay, what do I care? I care about things like electricity and roads and
[Guest]: sewage and water and all of those kinds of things and playgrounds and public spaces.
[Guest]: You could argue that in your sphere of influence, you can create these things by working among
[Guest]: yourselves in a certain way, except that you have to think of this yourselves part as including
[Guest]: the corporator, including the public officials and a few others as well. Deliberate engagement
[Guest]: of state market society can produce this outcome. You can even get company CSR to underwrite
[Guest]: a bunch of these things. In a typical community, there are enough people who can find some
[Guest]: sources of company CSR as well.
[Guest]: So I think we have a model in place that says joint action by citizens, the Sarkar and people
[Guest]: in businesses can produce outcomes at the local level. The real question in my mind
[Guest]: is can this also produce large outcomes? And in Bangalore, there's a really good example
[Guest]: of this. The suburban rail project, which is now being implemented is a fantastic example
[Guest]: of it. The suburban rail project came out of just a few people themselves studying the
[Guest]: tracks around the city, utilization on those tracks, figuring out what the spare capacity
[Guest]: might be and figuring out which neighborhoods and which tech parks and other destinations
[Guest]: could be usefully connected about it and putting that together as a proposal to start running
[Guest]: commuter trains in the peripheral areas. And it started just a handful of people. And the
[Guest]: fact that they were able to advocate it to a point of making it a popular demand, getting
[Guest]: an SPV established for this purpose, funded, and now trains are beginning to roll on that
[Guest]: track tells you that it's not just small problems that get solved by this kind of way of thinking
[Guest]: about development, but it has potential to solve some really large problems too.
[Amit Varma]: And so this is, again, a very interesting model. And I guess for something like the
[Amit Varma]: suburban railway system, you need, first of all, policy geek type of people who are actually
[Amit Varma]: sitting down and making those calculations and then more activist type of people who
[Amit Varma]: can spread those ideas in public and negotiators who can then talk to government about those
[Amit Varma]: things. The point that sort of interested me about what you said previously is that
[Amit Varma]: my question about the incentives of bureaucrats and government is misplaced because you also
[Amit Varma]: did it in a political way. And the incentives of politicians are obviously to respond to
[Amit Varma]: the demands of the marketplace, where at the supply end, therefore, your challenge is to
[Amit Varma]: create enough of a demand within local communities. And then governments sort of have no option.
[Amit Varma]: I'll ask you to...
[Guest]: I'll give you a useful tip in this. Whatever you say to your executive engineer, world
[Guest]: level engineer, executive engineer, tell it to his supervisor also. And whatever you tell
[Guest]: to him, tell it to your zonal commissioner also. Whatever you tell to him, tell it to
[Guest]: a corporator also. Whatever you tell your corporator, tell your MLA also. Whatever you
[Guest]: tell your MLA, tell the minister in charge also. And let each guy know that you will
[Guest]: be telling it to the guy above him. And this is, I do this very consciously and intentionally.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's important.
[Amit Varma]: And they're all listening to this episode now and going, whoa, Ashwin.
[Guest]: No, they know it also. But now they sort of know that I know the guy above them also.
[Guest]: In the beginning, I didn't know the guy above them. So you sort of have to make an effort.
[Guest]: Now, I actually know the guy above them as well. But I think, I'll tell you what it is.
[Guest]: Because you'd never really know who is potentially supportive, who is an obstacle, number one.
[Guest]: So you want to bring clarity to that by saying the same thing to many people and say, okay,
[Guest]: let's all have this conversation. The second thing is that sometimes people will come back
[Guest]: and say, sir, we can't do it because my boss is not agreeing or the minister is not agreeing
[Guest]: or MLA is not agreeing. So you want to be able to bypass that, kind of block it and
[Guest]: say, I want to be able to do it. That's all it is, right? And I feel it's important. And
[Guest]: again, increasing the number of problem-solving people disciplines the opposition to it also.
[Guest]: You can't be frivolous in opposition. You have to give reasons.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know that everyone in the chain is also listening in.
[Guest]: Yeah. And also, I used to run, when I was in government, I used to run a coordination
[Guest]: committee for South Bangalore. And you and I are living in our houses thinking that the
[Guest]: municipality and the water board and the electricity board, all these guys are going to work together
[Guest]: for our benefit. But if you go to a coordination meeting, you'll realize something else. Each
[Guest]: one of them is complaining about the other and saying, you know, this guy's not letting
[Guest]: me do my job. That guy's not returning the road to me. These guys aren't willing to close
[Guest]: the road, you know, traffic police, all sorts of things. And so you spend all your time
[Guest]: not solving public's problems, but actually resolving their own internal silos.
[Guest]: But after you do that for three weeks, four weeks, they know each other. In fact, the
[Guest]: first meeting that I had of this coordination committee, the different engineers looked
[Guest]: at each other and effectively said, who are these people? They never even met them. And
[Guest]: yet you and I are counting on them to collaborate and coordinate for outcomes. And I think that's
[Guest]: why it's important that sometimes the silos only get broken by being deliberate about
[Guest]: bringing people together.
[Amit Varma]: We'll take a quick commercial break now. And when we come back, get down to the nuts and
[Amit Varma]: bolts of participatory democracy or government by the people, as you put it.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art, but can't really afford to have paintings
[Amit Varma]: by the artists you like hanging on your walls? Well, worry no more. Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the
[Amit Varma]: best artists in India and adapts them into products of everyday use. These include wearable
[Amit Varma]: art like stoles and dresses for women and evening shirts for men. Home decor like wall
[Amit Varma]: plates, cushion covers and table linen and accessories like tote bags and pencil pouches.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales just like authors do. Their artists include luminaries
[Amit Varma]: like Dhruvi Acharya, Jaideep Mehrotra, Madhuri Kathe, Sameer Mondal, Brinda Miller, Tanmay
[Amit Varma]: Samanta, TM Aziz and Manisha Ghera Baswani. They accept bulk orders for corporate and
[Amit Varma]: festival gifting. But even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend, head on
[Amit Varma]: over to IndianColors.com. That's colors with an O-U. And if you want a 15% discount, apply
[Amit Varma]: the code unseen, U-N-S-E-E-N. That's unseen for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen. I'm chatting with Ashwin Mahesh, who I consider
[Amit Varma]: a sort of a guru of urban governance and so on, but who has also dabbled in politics.
[Amit Varma]: He was part of the Lok Satta Party, started by J.P. Narayan, another intellectual hero
[Amit Varma]: of mine with whom I've had a couple of episodes in the past. And then he was there at the
[Amit Varma]: birth of India Against Corruption. He played a big role in that and is now part of the
[Amit Varma]: Aam Aadmi Party, in fact. So again, to go back to biography, at what point did you think
[Amit Varma]: that you also have to get politically involved for things to happen?
[Guest]: Well, you know, in my mind, I've never accepted this separation between political and not
[Guest]: political. I'm trying to solve public problems. And whatever arena of action you need to be
[Guest]: in for that, that's what you need to do. In the late 90s, when Subbu Vincent and I started
[Guest]: India Together, we started publishing this development magazine, which I still edit and
[Guest]: publish. And one of the things that happened to me during the first six or eight years
[Guest]: of publishing India Together is that lots and lots of people in civil society and development
[Guest]: organizations, maybe even sometimes in government, wrote articles for the publication. And it
[Guest]: was a digital thing, but Subbu and I edited most of it ourselves. And the very act of
[Guest]: editing all these articles brought me to some understanding of what's going on in the power
[Guest]: sector, what's going on in the environment, what's going on in water supply, what's going
[Guest]: on in cities. It's basically, it's a daily education. Generalists are educating you daily.
[Guest]: You just have to apply your mind and make sure the content is streamlined well and presented
[Guest]: well and all of that. And at some point, you begin to realize that a big part of the obstacle
[Guest]: to development is political, that it's not merely an administrative matter. It's not
[Guest]: about getting the governance right and the staffing right and the budgets right and all
[Guest]: that. There's an element of willpower. There's an element of vested interest. There's an
[Guest]: element of collusion and corruption, all of that stuff that needs to be overcome as well.
[Guest]: You just know that. And you also recognize that a lot of this is coming from problems
[Guest]: in the electoral system. So in the, I'm going to say second half of the 90s, there was this
[Guest]: thing called the NCER, the National Campaign for Electoral Reforms. And that's when I first
[Guest]: began to work with JP. He, of course, sort of, in my mind, sort of pushed the idea of
[Guest]: administrative reforms and electoral reforms onto the national attention landscape more
[Guest]: than anybody else. And so it was a good place for me to sort of figure out this thing. And
[Guest]: I just started doing India Together as a digital platform. And so I said many of the things
[Guest]: that we are trying only in non-digital ways, we should try in digital ways as well. And
[Guest]: I think even he sort of saw the power of that and it actually became something. Some things
[Guest]: even happened in parliament through his interventions in electoral reforms or the capping the size
[Guest]: of the cabinet, for example, disclosure of assets and backgrounds. All of these things
[Guest]: happened through the NCER campaign and others who were doing similar work. And over time,
[Guest]: when you come to know everybody, you know what Aruna and Nikhil are doing in MKSS and
[Guest]: the right to information. You know what Arvind is doing with Parivartan in the public distribution
[Guest]: system. Over time, around the country, you begin to know who's doing what in different
[Guest]: fields, what's working, what's not working. And you also know all of these people as individuals
[Guest]: in some ways. And you can here and there find things that you can do with them. And so when
[Guest]: I came back to India as well, for two years, I worked closely with JP in the Administrative
[Guest]: Reforms Commission. The first four reports on right to information, the National Employment
[Guest]: Guarantee, public order, and one more of those reports. I worked on those with him. And then
[Guest]: that gives you an understanding of how the law and order system works, how our file movement
[Guest]: and disclosure of information can be improved in government. It's things like livelihood
[Guest]: in rural area. And for me, all of this was partly an education, but also partly an invitation
[Guest]: to do something, right? Because you're sort of standing in the space and you can see the
[Guest]: problem in front of you. And you don't have to be moved very much to begin doing something
[Guest]: about it. And then partway through the Administrative Reforms Commission, JP had more or less made
[Guest]: up his mind to form Lok Satta as a political party. I think Lok Satta is an interesting
[Guest]: idea because I think for the first time, somebody in India was saying there should be a liberal
[Guest]: political party. I mean, there are other claimants to this idea. I'm not going to dispute that.
[Guest]: But I think on the ground to try it out as an experiment with some potential for scale
[Guest]: coming from a popular figure known across the state at least. Lok Satta was a good experiment.
[Guest]: It was a really good experiment. And I remember participating in the early writings of the
[Guest]: constitution, the manifestos, and things like that. And subsequently, I sort of wrote down
[Guest]: some 11 or 12 points, which I think going forward can be part of a liberal manifesto
[Guest]: again and again. And I also began to see the ways in which a liberal view alone would be
[Guest]: inadequate in the Indian context. And a federal view also needed to intersect the liberal
[Guest]: view. And more recently, about two years ago, I wrote the federal manifesto points down
[Guest]: as well for me to sort of see where all these intersections happen. And by and large, I
[Guest]: did that as an exercise for myself to say, what do I believe about these public problems,
[Guest]: about the nature of the state, about the nature of citizenship and society and markets and
[Guest]: all of that? And what do I believe will be effective as a method to development? And
[Guest]: I think even though I wrote these things down primarily for myself, I was able to over time
[Guest]: develop those into things that I could communicate to other people and share. And some interesting
[Guest]: people have contributed. Barun, for example, has been part of that. I've learned from other
[Guest]: people who have thought about similar problems as well. But I think the future really does
[Guest]: depend critically on how we attain this balance, the balance in center-state relationships,
[Guest]: the balance between the private and the public, the balance between the state market and society.
[Guest]: Ultimately, I think of balance as the foundation for development. And so I was fascinated when
[Guest]: Lok Sattar came up as a political party. I was in it from the very beginning. I eventually
[Guest]: became vice president of Lok Sattar as well. And it was kind of interesting. We tried various
[Guest]: things. I think electorally, apart from JP's victory in the MLA elections, I forget which
[Guest]: year, 2008, in one year in Andhra Pradesh. Electorally, there wasn't a whole lot that
[Guest]: Lok Sattar was able to show. But I think it remained an important inspirational idea for
[Guest]: a lot of people who sensed that our current approach to politics and public problem solving
[Guest]: itself is wrong. That no matter how much you invest in the current approach, you could
[Guest]: not get to an idea of development. That Lok Sattar's view of a more liberal, more federated,
[Guest]: more participatory, more decentralized approach to development simply had more potential,
[Guest]: whether you agreed with it or not, whether you agreed with all of it or not. And I think
[Guest]: Lok Sattar remains an inspiration for people who sort of saw that. But obviously, you sort
[Guest]: of, at the end of India Against Corruption, I'm going to skip through to go to the political
[Guest]: part and then we'll come back to IAC. At the end of India Against Corruption, or towards
[Guest]: the end of IAC, the graduate constituency elections came up in Bangalore. And I said,
[Guest]: it's not a bad thing. It's a limited electorate. It's a citywide electorate of only educated
[Guest]: people. Maybe there's something we can try in this thing. And so the first time that
[Guest]: I contested an election, I was doing it, and even the second time, I was doing it only
[Guest]: for one reason, to say that it is possible, both possible and necessary, for public-spirited
[Guest]: but normal citizens to contest public office. That if we left this to merely lifelong political
[Guest]: players with really nothing else to do in life besides politics, you're not going to
[Guest]: get any idea of development from that. And the graduate constituency election was phenomenal.
[Guest]: I think some of the people who participated in it, Raj Shekhar Maram, Mastan, Srinivas
[Guest]: Alwale, people who sort of really gave their day, their life, whatever it is, to make that
[Guest]: campaign move. And the number of communities that sense that something different could
[Guest]: be done differently if we get into all this. It was very inspiring and interesting for
[Guest]: me. We came, I would say, reasonably close. But I think with more time, the problem in
[Guest]: the graduate constituency election is registering new voters, which is rigged in a certain way
[Guest]: that makes it difficult to break through. But with some superhuman efforts, we came
[Guest]: fairly close to doing that. And we also realized that there were some interesting things possible
[Guest]: in the process. There was one constituency in which the local MLA, who I knew well by
[Guest]: then, he said, you know, in my mind, I'm convinced that you're the best candidate. But I can't
[Guest]: go against my party. Right? So here's what I'll do. I'll not campaign against you. And
[Guest]: when people say things like that, you realize the politics is what it is. Partisanship is
[Guest]: what it is. But underneath that partisanship, there is potential for people to collaborate
[Guest]: for the public good. But fundamentally, a subset of the political class, I won't say
[Guest]: all, a subset of the political class is willing to acknowledge that we need to be purposeful.
[Guest]: And that if people come forward who seem to be purposeful, genuinely, they will cross
[Guest]: party lines. And on voting day, in the graduate constituency election, there's about some
[Guest]: 15, 20 voting booths set up all over the city. And I went around a lot of them. In many of
[Guest]: the booths, the local Congress co-operator or the BJP co-operator or MLA would come out,
[Guest]: spend time, take pictures with me. And just to say, you know, it's interesting that we're
[Guest]: doing this differently. This kind of change is necessary. You may not be from our party,
[Guest]: but this is an important thing. And I felt that there is potential to work across party
[Guest]: lines in a lot of this. Adwaniji said this, that during his time in politics, there was
[Guest]: a lot more cross party engagement. And one of the things we sort of lamented almost eight
[Guest]: or nine years ago is the erosion of cross party collaboration in a lot of this.
[Guest]: So my first forays in politics were primarily to say, anyone can do this. It's not winning
[Guest]: and losing, actually, that matters. But once you establish the idea that anyone can do
[Guest]: this, then more and more people begin to come into it, that ordinary people can, in fact,
[Guest]: collectively express an interest in a certain kind of government and form a political party
[Guest]: for that reason, contest an election and go forward with it. And if you look it up, really,
[Guest]: it means that narrative, certainly. You've come together, you form a political party
[Guest]: for a reason and a certain idea of government, and you go out, contest and even win. And
[Guest]: I look at what happened in Delhi as really a better kind of proof of the idea that had
[Guest]: even previously existed, that we could challenge the conventional space. Lok Satta had not
[Guest]: been adequately strong and adequately, one could even say adequately purposeful in tackling
[Guest]: that challenge. But maybe perhaps benefiting from the moment offered by India against corruption
[Guest]: was able to do that. And I think having opened the door a little bit, now there is potential
[Guest]: to open the door much wider. It remains to be seen. So now I'll go back to IAC, because
[Guest]: I sort of went from my interest before IAC to after. IAC is kind of an interesting beast,
[Guest]: because broadly, there were multiple starting points to it. And I have some, it's like touching
[Guest]: an elephant at some level. Even the people who are standing next to it can't see all
[Guest]: of it. And it went in certain ways, and it didn't go in certain ways. The first anti-corruption
[Guest]: rally that we did was actually here in Bangalore. Arvind was visiting, I think he was visiting
[Guest]: CIVIC perhaps, one of the local NGOs. JP was also in at the same time. And it sort of occurred
[Guest]: to a few people, Rithvireddy, Rajmaram, Amarmurthy, a few people that we could, Srinivasan, that
[Guest]: we could use this opportunity to put out a public protest against corruption in governments.
[Guest]: And that was, we called it SAKU, and it was organized. It was a nice winter morning in
[Guest]: Covent Park. It was a fantastic day to be out on the street. I like to say a fantastic
[Guest]: day to protest as well. And about 3,000 people came to that. And people who were well-regarded
[Guest]: figures in society also showed up at that meeting. I won't go into who is who, but it
[Guest]: made us realize two things. That there was possibly a way to engage with people who normally
[Guest]: wouldn't step out of their homes to participate in public expressions of anger and demands
[Guest]: for certain things. That there is a latent demand for change in the political space.
[Guest]: And I remember, and then there was a sort of a speech, slash whatever, at the Langford
[Guest]: Town Park. I think it's called Akhita Manali Park. And we were sort of sitting on some
[Guest]: ambassador car under one tree and just talking about this. And then the sort of the idea,
[Guest]: the idea, the discussion moved to the idea of saying, what if you did this everywhere?
[Guest]: And Arvind had at that time been experimenting with something called group vote. And group
[Guest]: vote was the idea which he wanted to try in the Municipal Council election. That essentially
[Guest]: you get clusters of people to vote together, either for a candidate or for a certain goal.
[Guest]: And the power of this collective vote could discipline the electoral process that much
[Guest]: more. He was already sort of experimenting with that. In parallel, of course, the demand
[Guest]: for the Lokpal was going on. So there are three pieces, at least. The emergence of spontaneous
[Guest]: protest by people in different cities who broadly know each other, but whose origins
[Guest]: for protesting are quite disparate. The efforts in those respective geographies for changing
[Guest]: the political and electoral system. And the Lokpal as a Lokpal Bill as a focal point for
[Guest]: intervention and various things that happened in that. And somehow it just came together
[Guest]: in some way that it just went from that first rally to the next one and the next one. And
[Guest]: before you know it, there was very large number of people. And I'm going to say this, which
[Guest]: I don't really have. There are a couple of things that I haven't really talked about
[Guest]: publicly. And I know many people in IAC don't talk about this publicly. I'm going to say
[Guest]: Anna was not there in the beginning. He had, of course, led his own campaigns for change
[Guest]: in the electoral system, change in the governance system, including articulating a demand for
[Guest]: the Lokpal. Around the same time that we held this first rally, he had written to the Prime
[Guest]: Minister, Dr. Singh at that time, essentially saying, I'm going to sit on fast if we don't
[Guest]: do this. At that point, of course, it wasn't really an IAC action or anything like that.
[Guest]: It was just saying, I want this damn law and we're going to push for it. And it was kind
[Guest]: of funny because in March, as Anna's fast date approached, somebody from the government
[Guest]: called me up and said, you have a copy of this letter that he wrote to the Prime Minister.
[Guest]: We can't even seem to find it. And one of the things that happened in IAC, it's kind
[Guest]: of an interesting thing what has happened in IAC and since IAC. Congress and civil society,
[Guest]: because of this thing that I told you earlier about NGOs emerging as intermediaries in the
[Guest]: idea of good Indianness, Congress and civil society have historically been allies. IAC
[Guest]: effectively chopped that off by basically saying this intermediation is no longer required.
[Guest]: That those who want to speak for a different idea of government should be able to just
[Guest]: get away from that thing and do it themselves in a way. The Lokpal became a point of focus.
[Guest]: And then a few days before the first planned protest in early April, there was a meeting
[Guest]: around that time in Delhi. JP had called that meeting, calling people from different organizations
[Guest]: together. Maybe that was later in July or something. But I remember there was a time
[Guest]: that year where JP sort of called a lot of different people. And there were three broadly
[Guest]: during the struggle for the Lokpal bill. There were three broad versions of the bill. Arvind
[Guest]: with his sort of allies had put together a version. I mean, which was presented as broadly
[Guest]: through IAC. Lok Sattar had drafted its version, which subsequently even Dr. Singh sort of
[Guest]: seemed to embrace a little bit in Parliament. Aruna and Nikhil had put forward another set
[Guest]: of views on how sort of thing. So there was a little bit of an effort to try to see whether
[Guest]: all of this could come together. That didn't go very well. That didn't go very well. But
[Guest]: I think it did help coalesce a lot of different people around the idea that there are shared
[Guest]: goals here. That if you're going to go different ways about it, and even if you have strong
[Guest]: opinions about your methods or my methods, we're going to fundamentally have to accept
[Guest]: that these things are broadly what they are. And I think broadly, if people didn't speak
[Guest]: poorly of each other, that was at least the minimum that you could expect in that. And
[Guest]: I think that's still true. There's a lot of affection and respect across that whole spectrum
[Guest]: of participants in India against corruption, even if there are differences about what should
[Guest]: have been done here or there. And you know that story. It went where it went. And then
[Guest]: came the question of... I'm skipping past a lot of details of what happened during the
[Guest]: fast in Delhi. I don't think... Those are interesting tidbits, but we'll save those
[Guest]: for another day. But really the question that came up after the campaign was the question
[Guest]: of forming a political party. And this forming of the political party included another event
[Guest]: about which not much is known. And this is the meeting of the Constitution Club to...
[Guest]: Essentially Anna had convened, I'm going to say about 60 to 70 people, to put the question
[Guest]: to a discussant group like that to say... And he'd even said, by and large, I don't
[Guest]: want this to be an IAC event, because if you sort of turn it into an IAC event, the same
[Guest]: set of you guys who, quote-unquote, ran the event at some level, would probably stack
[Guest]: the deck against the decisions being frank. I mean, the conversations being frank. So
[Guest]: we said we're all quite open to take inputs from anybody else. That was the first time
[Guest]: I met Yogendra Yadav in one of these kinds of settings. He was part moderator of that
[Guest]: discussion. People from all over the country would come from different walks of life there.
[Guest]: I think it was also the first time I met Ashutosh. And just a few people who didn't really come
[Guest]: in through the movement, but who saw the potential that it had and people who sort of engaged
[Guest]: with it in their own way, and subsequently even became strong parts of it, were starting
[Guest]: to come together. And without elaborating... And there were not that many people from IAC.
[Guest]: Arvind was there, I was there, Prashant was there, Kiran was there, of course, at that
[Guest]: time. There were not that many people from IAC itself. And just to say... Broadly, I
[Guest]: would say... I'll say only one thing, and I'm not going to elaborate on that. Throughout
[Guest]: the day's conversation, it was broadly agreed among the discussions that it's useful and
[Guest]: healthy to form a political party to take this forward. And that if the political party
[Guest]: appeared to stray towards the normal traditional politics of every party, we must have the
[Guest]: discipline to either exit that thing, or the forcefulness to correct course and keep going
[Guest]: forward. And broadly, this is how that discussion went. Various people said it is possible to
[Guest]: build that kind of political organization, and that it is necessary to build at least
[Guest]: one example of that in India. My sense of it is, throughout the day, Anna agreed with
[Guest]: a lot of the stuff. But he went out and said the opposite. And that's all I'm going to
[Guest]: say about it. I mean, there has been a divergence with Anna. I don't deny that. But I didn't
[Guest]: think that divergence came from anything that we said or he said to each other. It happened
[Guest]: in whatever way it happened. But it also became not that important from that point onwards.
[Guest]: Because anyway, I think as a group, the discussion seemed to indicate a direction to go in. And
[Guest]: quickly thereafter, the party was formed. And by November, it was actually launched.
[Guest]: So once you've moved to that point, yes, you would have the occasional thing in the news
[Guest]: headlines about Annaji having this opinion or that opinion, or being happy about this,
[Guest]: unhappy about that, and all of that. But broadly, it was done. That day, broadly, the divergence
[Guest]: began. And IAC as a campaign, I won't say that was the end of it. But it was understood
[Guest]: from that point onward, that even the Lokpal Agenda had to be taken forward from there
[Guest]: onwards in the political space only that the sort of civic, public spirited, public purpose
[Guest]: campaign that IAC had been without other people's participation and support. That mode was over.
[Guest]: But you now have to sort of take this up as a political question only. And that's where
[Amit Varma]: it ended.
[Amit Varma]: So I did a recent episode on radically networked societies with Pranay Kutasane, where we sort
[Amit Varma]: of looked at movements of the past, like the Arab Spring and even before. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one interesting point that the author Zainab Tufekci made in her book, Twitter and Tear
[Amit Varma]: Gas about such movements, is that there are three sort of dimensions through which you
[Amit Varma]: have to look at them. One, you have to look at the narrative capacity, how they build
[Amit Varma]: a narrative around a particular thing, which IAC, of course, did very successfully with
[Amit Varma]: the, you know, making corruption the focus of it. Second, you have to look at the disruptive
[Amit Varma]: capacity, where again, it would seem that it worked out well with IAC. And the third
[Amit Varma]: is you have to look at the electoral slash political capacity. And a lot of these other
[Amit Varma]: movements of the Arab Spring really fizzled out without doing much in the political sphere.
[Amit Varma]: Some like, you know, like Syriza in Greece, for example, came out of a movement and achieve
[Amit Varma]: political success. But my question here is that the moment as this sort of political
[Amit Varma]: phase, the imperatives of electoral politics come into play, where you're, you know, as
[Amit Varma]: a movement, your dharma is to achieve whatever aim you are aiming for, and you can be idealistic.
[Amit Varma]: As a political party, your dharma is to win votes. And I do see a conflict between this
[Amit Varma]: because even in terms of how AAP has been governing, I see various instances where it
[Amit Varma]: has given into the imperative of votes over idealism. Quick examples that come to mind
[Amit Varma]: is, Vishal Dadlani apologizing for, you know, offending that Jain priest because a Jain
[Amit Varma]: vote bank mattered to Mr. Kejriwal. Then, for example, opposing FDI in retail because
[Amit Varma]: part of their vote base is an interest group of small traders. Even recently, they're not
[Amit Varma]: coming out as strongly as many liberals feel they should have against the abolition of
[Amit Varma]: 370 and the CAA. And at one level, of course, I totally get the practical argument that
[Guest]: for them.
[Guest]: I can give you even more examples, I'm sure. I'll concede the point. But I'll only say
[Guest]: that what you lose in depth, you gain in breadth. A movement for a certain purpose has clarity
[Guest]: of that purpose and the self-righteousness to not think about anything else. A political
[Guest]: party doesn't have that room for self-righteousness. But it has potential to do 10 more things
[Guest]: out of being in the same space. The movement has limited capacity to do anything more than
[Guest]: the one purpose for which it's established.
[Guest]: So now you have to ask yourself, if you're able to build schools for children that can't
[Guest]: go to school, if you're able to provide healthcare for people who are needlessly ill or dying
[Guest]: because they didn't have the cost, I mean, they couldn't afford the cost of care, would
[Guest]: you take that? And I submit only that there is no uniform answer to that. I'm not saying
[Guest]: that my answer is right or yours is right. If it's less pure, that's less pure. I don't
[Guest]: think anybody can say it's not less pure. And there's a picture in my mind, I've said
[Guest]: this in many, many people who heard me speak will sort of remember that there's a picture
[Guest]: in my mind from an article that, I'm going to say Dilip D'Souza or somebody like that
[Guest]: wrote many years ago. It's a picture of a child standing next to a garbage bin, one
[Guest]: of those cement bins that we build all over the country. The bin is overflowing, the child
[Guest]: is like a girl child, scantily clad, some rags, disheveled hair, clearly not had a bath
[Guest]: in many days. And the child sort of is seeming to, quote-unquote, eat from that space. Now
[Guest]: you take that picture and you ask yourself, what should you do? What should you do if
[Guest]: that's the reality? If you're going along in your car and you start at a traffic light
[Guest]: and somebody, some child knocks on the door and is begging from you, what should you do?
[Guest]: The immediate question is, well, maybe you can give her some money. Maybe some people
[Guest]: would have a different view even of that. Well, you really shouldn't encourage that,
[Guest]: all sorts of things. But I'm saying, leave that. I'm not asking the immediate question.
[Guest]: What should you do about the fact that a four-year-old child or a five-year-old child is begging
[Guest]: on the street, is eating from a dumpster? And if the only answer you can give to that
[Guest]: question is, well, really there's not much I can do, then I think you're missing a lot.
[Guest]: And if you take the view that if I can't do everything to correct this, then none of it
[Guest]: is worth doing, then also you're missing a lot. I think the challenge for each one of
[Guest]: us is to be able to do what we can. Pursue the ideal, but recognize that you can't allow
[Guest]: the good to become the enemy of the ideal. I don't say this as excusing any of the things
[Guest]: that I, and I myself publicly disagreed with some of these things that you gave as examples.
[Guest]: I think that's all right. But I think, in fact, by and large, I think there's far more
[Guest]: room. Now, apart from any of these spaces, parties coming from citizens' movements, there's
[Guest]: far more space for disagreement, with one obvious exception. We'll talk about that too.
[Guest]: And I think the important thing, if you want to maintain the room for dissent, the room
[Guest]: for disagreement with anybody, is first for you to be committed to doing things yourself
[Guest]: with or without anybody. Once you have made up your mind that in pursuit of universal
[Guest]: education or universal care or just the dignity of all people, you are going to do something
[Guest]: with or without anybody else, then all the things that you do with anyone are potentially
[Guest]: strength-giving exercises to that. But even if you lost those alliances, you must still
[Guest]: have the capacity and the willingness to go forward, even if no one else were with you.
[Guest]: And I think that's when you become really able to dissent. That's when you really become
[Guest]: able to stay a little more faithful to the ideal, a little closer to the ideal, and not
[Guest]: compromising for good. But it's fair to say that if you didn't win, you couldn't begin
[Guest]: to implement an agenda that would help that child. And that's also true. It is not...
[Guest]: If there is a compromise in that, a compromise that is thrust upon you by society and what
[Guest]: society has allowed, it is too simplistic in my view to call that a compromise of ideals
[Guest]: itself. You must recognize that it is a deviation from the ideal. I don't, for a moment, deny
[Guest]: that. But a deviation from the ideal isn't always a compromise of the ideal itself. You
[Guest]: continue to accept that the ideal is what it is. You even accept that you're falling
[Guest]: short of the ideal, but that's not the same as compromise.
[Amit Varma]: So I completely buy your point that there are trade-offs involved. And by turning from
[Amit Varma]: a movement into a party, you lose that depth and that purity, but you also gain breadth
[Amit Varma]: and the ability to actually do some things, which is a reason I buy. But it could also
[Amit Varma]: be a rationalization. And the other sort of homily that comes up very often in the podcast
[Amit Varma]: is that politics corrodes character. And the reason for that is the incentives of electoral
[Amit Varma]: politics that you want vote banks to vote for you, so you have to pander to them. At
[Amit Varma]: the same time, you need money to fight elections, so you have to pander to interest groups.
[Amit Varma]: And over a period of time, I really can't think of any example where that hasn't happened.
[Amit Varma]: But this is an open question, obviously, because I guess you would say AAP is a work in progress,
[Amit Varma]: but some would argue that what you're saying about space for dissent and openness and so
[Amit Varma]: on, if you look at what happened to Yogendra Yadav or Prashant Bhushan or other leaders
[Guest]: after them.
[Guest]: So let's take that. I want to give you a little bit of insight into that. And again, you can
[Guest]: sort of sense that I'm using this podcast to say a few things or a hint at a few things.
[Guest]: I'm very happy for you to say all these things.
[Guest]: No, but here's what I would say. We'll come to Prashant in a minute. But on this question
[Guest]: of the homilies you referred to, yes, I think that's why it's important to concede that
[Guest]: you are straying from the ideal. And there is an ideal. And to make the ideal the metric.
[Guest]: And therefore, say, look, it is what it is. This is a strain from the ideal. But the ideal
[Guest]: does not change because I strayed from it. I strayed from it. And I think people are
[Guest]: sensible enough to accept that, number one.
[Guest]: The second thing is to say that we can stray from the ideal, knowing that we are straying
[Guest]: from it. But also within that itself, keep constantly looking for ways to get back to
[Guest]: the ideal. That's all it is. That on a day if you do something because you don't want
[Guest]: to offend somebody, you want to get their vote on election day, whatever it is. Yeah,
[Guest]: but it hasn't taken away the ideal. A lot of the straying can be momentary. Just because
[Guest]: you took a step to the left doesn't mean you can't correct that and come back to the right
[Guest]: or the other way around. And I think systems need that capacity, resilient capacity to
[Guest]: keep coming back to what they originally set out to do.
[Guest]: And you can also do structural things. I favor term limits. I think people who are elected
[Guest]: to a public office should not serve in that office for more than two terms. If you do
[Guest]: that, you will automatically create a kind of discipline. This politics corrupts this
[Guest]: character, blah, blah, blah. You just give the guy a hint that a few years from now you're
[Guest]: not going to be in this job. Think about what you're going to be doing after that and get
[Guest]: on with that too in life. I think you can perform better if you have term limits.
[Amit Varma]: It also, to intersect here, creates an incentive in the opposite direction because given that
[Amit Varma]: we live under a predatory state, it creates an incentive of, oh, I'm only going to be
[Amit Varma]: in power for two terms. Let me make as much money as I can.
[Guest]: Correct, correct. That is true. For that, you need other checks and balances as well.
[Guest]: If this was the only check you imposed on yourself, you would have that problem. The
[Guest]: main check and balance that the Indian system is missing today is the separation of powers.
[Guest]: That's really the problem, right? The legislatures don't, for practical purposes, the legislators
[Guest]: don't exist. To my knowledge, since 1983, at least, there has not been a law proposed
[Guest]: by the government, but defeated by the lower house of either parliament or any state.
[Amit Varma]: And one reason for this, of course, is the anti-defection law, which stifles debate.
[Guest]: Yeah. So essentially, the legislature is not, quote unquote, necessary. I did a little exercise
[Guest]: some years ago. And the other thing is also that because the legislatures have been reduced
[Guest]: to this irrelevance in law making, whatever the government proposes passes. So there isn't
[Guest]: really all this thing that we talk about. Occasionally, there'll be a parliamentary
[Guest]: debate about this. It's just television. It's showmanship. It makes no difference to the
[Guest]: vote itself in some way. Unless parties as a whole support this or that bill in coalitions,
[Guest]: lawmaking has ceased to have too much value. It's more like, you can remember Sushma Swaraj
[Guest]: speaking in parliament, not because it changed anybody's opinion on how to vote on that thing.
[Guest]: It's just that she said it and it was oratorically nice and all of those kind of things. But
[Guest]: it made no difference, fundamentally. Those who voted for something were always going
[Guest]: to vote for it. Those who voted against it were always going to vote against it. And
[Guest]: partly because the legislator doesn't have the freedom to vote as he says. So the separation
[Guest]: of powers is one. And I think the courts have contributed to this a little bit by not clamping
[Guest]: down on the anti-defection law yet. The anti-defection law really should apply only to confidence
[Guest]: motions. It's obvious that it should apply only to confidence motions. But party bosses
[Guest]: wanted to apply to every law, every bill. That's all it is. Even today, there is nothing
[Guest]: in Lok Satta. And these are the sorts of things that we try. Lok Satta didn't have a whip.
[Guest]: You could argue that if you don't have many elected representatives, not having a whip
[Guest]: doesn't really mean anything. But I would like to see the day that Aam Aadmi Party does
[Guest]: not have a whip. And I think it's important not to have a whip. Because when you don't
[Guest]: have a whip, I mean, you can have a whip for like one line whips and all that. I don't
[Guest]: think you should have two line whips and three line whips. We can talk about those later.
[Guest]: But what I'm really trying to say is that if the parties don't encourage the independence
[Guest]: of the legislature, then almost anybody can be nominated because you don't really need
[Guest]: them to do anything more than say press yes when they're asked to press yes and press
[Amit Varma]: no when they're asked to press yes.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you can literally run government from an Excel sheet once the elections are done.
[Amit Varma]: And I had an episode on this with Varun Mitra where we discussed the anti-defection law.
[Guest]: But if you remove the whip, everyone becomes important. And there's a legislative record
[Guest]: of every legislator as well. And I think therefore, the whip should be removed. The anti-defection
[Guest]: law, in my view, is unconstitutional. But courts have allowed it to continue in the
[Guest]: mistaken view that it somehow curbs horse trading. In fact, it has led to an extreme
[Guest]: form of horse trading. And Karnataka is a sort of a celebrated example of all kinds
[Guest]: of horses. I mean, frankly, even to call them horses is a little bit of an insult to horses.
[Guest]: Well, OK, if you put it that way. You know what I'm trying to say, that I think that's
[Guest]: the problem. Term limits are important. Separation of powers is important. The independence of
[Guest]: legislators is important. Local courts are important. There are lots of these pieces.
[Guest]: The regulatory bodies need to be far more autonomous. Sarkar should stop doing things
[Guest]: that it is also a regulatory law. You can't have a system in which the Sarkar runs some
[Guest]: banks and it also runs the regulatory banks. The Sarkar runs some schools and it also runs
[Guest]: the regulatory schools. You just cannot. It just makes no sense. And the courts have also
[Guest]: been amiss in another thing. Many regulatory institutions, like the Information Commissions,
[Guest]: for example, or just independent commissions like the Information Commission, are in law.
[Guest]: It says clearly that a fair number of them have to be from outside Babudham. And it has
[Guest]: never been done. And yet the courts have looked away from it, except the courts tend to frown
[Guest]: on a few things that government does. And I'll tell you, I have one overriding criticism
[Guest]: of the courts. The courts are biased against citizens and biased in favor of governments.
[Guest]: That is, if you are in court and you are one party and the government is the other party,
[Guest]: even if the government puts out a blatant lie, the courts are broadly inclined to punt
[Guest]: that ball, rather than say, call it for what it is. I mean, it is 27 years, 28 getting
[Guest]: on soon, since the 74th Constitutional Amendment for Urban Decentralization was passed. The
[Guest]: Metropolitan Planning Committee for Bangalore is notified but has no members. What would
[Guest]: stop any court from saying, implement the law? But if the government were to go to the
[Guest]: court and say, we are studying this, we are studying that, it's under consideration, the
[Guest]: court will say, ha ha, come back in four weeks. You understand? The law is very clear that
[Guest]: there shall be ward committees in every ward, and the ward committee shall be formed immediately
[Guest]: after the formation of the council, and that they shall meet every month. Everything is
[Guest]: clear. It's just not done. But if the court were to pull up the government, the government
[Guest]: will give some explanation, we are studying this, some combination of these things will
[Guest]: happen, and the courts will say, in four weeks we'll look at it. The courts ruled very long
[Guest]: time ago, and in your field you're familiar with this, that news on radio should be permitted.
[Guest]: The government's position, 20 years after the ruling, is that it is still writing the
[Guest]: rules for allowing news on radio. The courts have ruled a very long time ago, in the Prakash
[Guest]: Singh case, that there shall be independent police complaints authorities in every state,
[Guest]: and the whole slew of police reforms were listed in that case. Most governments have
[Guest]: not done anything on those things. The courts have taken the view that, ha, ho jayega. They
[Guest]: first take the view that if the citizens are aggrieved by this, they must come and sort
[Guest]: of petition the courts to force the government to do it. But apart from punting, if they
[Guest]: do nothing, which citizen is going to believe that the court is going to do anything on
[Guest]: this thing. So by and large, the courts have allowed themselves to be seen as not sufficiently
[Guest]: engaged with process-driven reforms. Occasionally there's a question of the constitutional validity
[Guest]: of this or that. Some important question comes up on which one ruling or the other is given.
[Guest]: But where governance improvement needs to result from creating a balance between state
[Guest]: market and society, the courts have had a predilection to favour the Sarkar and therefore
[Amit Varma]: have come in the way of creating that balance. And I guess the structural reasons for why
[Amit Varma]: this is the case would take up an entirely different episode. So let's kind of stay on
[Amit Varma]: the subject going back to, you know, the topic of dissent on ARP, where, you know, and my
[Amit Varma]: sense is that every party will naturally tend to drift towards a centralised version where
[Amit Varma]: an increasingly smaller and smaller group of people get a grip on power, whether it's
[Amit Varma]: family in the Congress or whether it's the BJP now led by only two people. And it would
[Amit Varma]: seem that ARP went through an accelerated version of this with so many other leaders
[Guest]: of stature being sort of forced to leave. Yes or no? Okay, I'll tell you two things
[Guest]: that happened. One, immediately after IAC, quote unquote, ended, came the question of
[Guest]: if you're going into the political space, what should Lok Satna do? Right? And I think
[Guest]: JP was inclined to the view that there need not be multiple forces trying the same things.
[Guest]: And that if there's a way to converge them, we must be willing to explore that. So we
[Guest]: tried, a few of us tried to say, can we converge this thing and say whatever it is, whatever
[Guest]: brand it is, whatever it is. And you were part of Lok Satna then? Yeah, I was part of
[Guest]: Lok Satna then. I was kind of, you know, I'm sort of in a peculiar position. I've always
[Guest]: been sort of part of Lok Satna. Also, I mean, when Apo Swaminarayan invited me to be a member
[Guest]: of the national executive, I attended the launch of the party. I was probably the only
[Guest]: non-party person who spoke at the launch. I know them as people, right? A lot of us
[Guest]: know each other as people. And I think that's really the foundation of it. It's not whether
[Guest]: you agree, disagree, it's whether you're in this shoe or that shoe. And twice, I sort
[Guest]: of declined to leave Lok Satna. I mean, until Lok Satna decided to hold as a political party
[Guest]: and give up its political mission, I said, I mean, it's like, you know, you don't leave
[Guest]: one of your friends to go join another one. That's all it is. And it's also not necessary
[Guest]: to leave one of your friends to go join. You can do it transparently. I'm with you. I'm
[Guest]: with you too, right? And my preference is the two of you come together and do something.
[Guest]: How did those efforts work out? They did go a fair distance. I think JB was for it. I
[Guest]: think Arvind was for it. They did meet, they did discuss it. I think broadly, they were
[Guest]: both for it. And if that moment had come through, I think whatever it was, Lok Satna, Aam Aadmi
[Guest]: Party would have instantly been in a few other states, especially in the South as well. It
[Guest]: would have gained from a more distributed leadership. It would have sort of, I think
[Guest]: the brand building exercise across the country would have benefited tremendously. And, you
[Guest]: know, JP certainly would have brought a degree of a different kind of personage, if you will,
[Guest]: to the overall thing. And that's needed even today. And to an extent, one could even argue
[Guest]: that Yogendra brought some of that personage as well. But you need that. You need distributed
[Guest]: leadership. You need, especially because ultimately, if you're going to capture power in more than
[Guest]: one state, you need people to be able to stand up in those states.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it could have, just thinking aloud, could have been a national party today and
[Amit Varma]: a real alternative.
[Guest]: Could have, yes. And the only thing I will say is that I don't blame Arvind for it. I
[Guest]: think he was for it, that he actually understood that it was possible. I'm not going to say
[Guest]: it's his first instinct or last instinct, but when it was put forward, I don't think
[Guest]: he stood in the way. But it didn't happen. It didn't happen in any event.
[Guest]: Why didn't it?
[Guest]: I don't know this for sure, but I felt Yogendra and Prashant were not for it. I don't know
[Guest]: this for sure. And perhaps a few other people were not for it as well. And the moment passed.
[Guest]: And the subsequent thing about what happened with Yogendra and Prashant, I'm not really
[Guest]: privy to that well enough to be able to comment on that. But clearly, one could see that the
[Guest]: kind of thing that we spoke about earlier, that whether the good is the enemy or the
[Guest]: ideal permeated that debate. And perhaps it was a bit of a scimitar to the whole thing
[Guest]: to say, get on with it. Either you're with me or against me. It was unnecessary. And
[Guest]: I think the movement did lose as a result.
[Guest]: One could argue that the pragmatic side was able to at least go forward with its pragmatism.
[Guest]: But I think the movement did lose. All said and done, I've known Prashant for many years
[Guest]: and I have a fair amount of regard for the things that he has tried to do. And it would
[Guest]: have been nice to be able to go forward with him as well. I'm not talking about the party
[Guest]: itself. The party is sort of an instrument that you create. The purpose is what brings
[Guest]: people together. And the party is a brand and popularity building exercise for that
[Guest]: purpose in some way. And I think the fact that people started to go in different directions,
[Guest]: we did lose as a result of this. And I don't think... The loss to me is not that we lost
[Guest]: the opportunity to build a national party. The loss to me is that we lost the opportunity
[Guest]: to accelerate movement towards the goals that you had set for yourself. That's all it is.
[Guest]: I would be quite happy if Congress or BJP or 20 other parties also did the same thing.
[Guest]: But I also want to say one other thing. I think during the Rajya Sabha elections in
[Guest]: Delhi about 18 months ago, something like that. Now, there was an opportunity to bridge
[Guest]: this. Whatever you call it, bridge this. And that also was tried. But it didn't happen
[Guest]: again. And again, I give credit to Arvind. He was willing to try that. But it didn't
[Guest]: happen. It takes two hands to clap. That's all it is.
[Guest]: What was the opportunity? Sorry, I'm not aware of it.
[Guest]: Well, the app could dominate three people to the Rajya Sabha in Delhi. And that was
[Guest]: a good opportunity to say, whatever the differences may have been in the past, can we consider
[Guest]: a scenario in which we come back together again? And in the process, maybe make one
[Guest]: of those guys, one of those members as well. And I think that opportunity existed. Arvind
[Guest]: was not against it. But it didn't happen.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So, before we eventually go back to the central theme of this participatory democracy...
[Guest]: So, the reason I'm saying this is not to sort of park the blame at somebody else's door.
[Guest]: Because I think even today, even today, and it's not so much about Prashant or about Yogendra,
[Guest]: any one set of people. Even today, I think there is need to build a broad coalition for
[Guest]: a public purpose that spans multiple states, that has understanding of the realities of
[Guest]: multiple states, and is able to function through local leadership and local purpose for those
[Guest]: goals. It's needed. And if a political brand provides a canvas on which to go and try that,
[Guest]: that is even today, the best thing to do. Even if there is a way in which the forces
[Guest]: that converged into the civil society side of India against corruption, those forces
[Guest]: still have a role to play together in taking governance to the next level. Because I look
[Guest]: at what has happened in the last five years in Delhi government. And I look at that as
[Guest]: really demonstrating the public administration can be improved, even within the existing
[Guest]: scheme of things that focus on public service delivery can help, that rationalization of
[Guest]: services can help, ease of interacting with government can be, you know, some of those
[Amit Varma]: kinds of things.
[Guest]: So, let me segue for that.
[Guest]: Give me a second. I should have said one other thing earlier. I did an exercise about a year
[Guest]: ago to say how much were bills being debated in the assembly before they were being passed
[Guest]: in Delhi assembly. And PRS did some stuff and came back with a set of answers. Then
[Guest]: I asked them to do it only for the period that Aath had been in power. And the data
[Guest]: wasn't very different. Fundamentally, most bills are debated for a very short period
[Guest]: of time. The public doesn't even come to know of these bills before they are passed. And
[Guest]: coupled with the anti-depression law.
[Guest]: So I proposed two things that I still think are worth doing in some legislature. Ideally,
[Guest]: I'd like to see AAP do this, but you know, I'm happy if any political party does. I think
[Guest]: a bill that is proposed in one session of an assembly should only be passed in the next
[Guest]: session of the assembly. I mean, there should be a minimum period post the introduction
[Guest]: of a bill that allows opportunity for the public to come to know about it, to engage
[Guest]: with their elected representative about it, give input, and only then voting should take
[Amit Varma]: place.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great idea.
[Guest]: That's all. It doesn't require anything more than a pause between introductions. And so
[Guest]: the simplest pause is to say, you introduce it in this session, unless it's some nationally
[Guest]: important emergency matter, you vote on it only in the next session. I feel that can
[Guest]: definitely help.
[Guest]: The second thing that I propose, which I also hope will come back, and with 66 MLAs, this
[Guest]: should have been easy. The second thing that I proposed is to say, any group of 10 MLAs
[Guest]: or 15 MLAs, if you like, including not necessarily your MLAs, any parties, any group of 15 MLAs,
[Guest]: or let's say any group of 15% of the MLAs of a state assembly or parliament must be
[Guest]: able to introduce a bill without the speaker rejecting it from being tabled. Any group
[Guest]: of 15% of legislators must be able to table a bill and demand that the whole house vote
[Guest]: on it. Then you would be restoring the legislative function. Today, legislators don't introduce
[Guest]: bills. Legislators only vote on bills introduced by the government. So if these sorts of things
[Guest]: are tried, and I'm talking about this, this doesn't require any change in the anti-defection
[Guest]: law. It only requires a different stance in government, any government, whether it's
[Guest]: Amadni Party or BJP or Congress or any other government, to say these are necessary improvements
[Guest]: in our politics.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so before we move back to the subject of government by the people and participatory
[Amit Varma]: democracy, I want to ask one final question about politics, which is, you know, as our
[Amit Varma]: mutual friend Varun Mitra is fond of pointing out, there is an Indian politics, what he
[Amit Varma]: calls an ideological convergence, in the sense that in terms of ideology, even if we use
[Amit Varma]: a flawed left-right spectrum, which doesn't make sense in the context of India, but even
[Amit Varma]: within that spectrum, all parties are to the left in economics, that is to say they are
[Amit Varma]: statist and they are to the right on social issues, that is to say that even if they are
[Amit Varma]: not actively vowing the Hindu vote, as the BJP and the Congress do, they won't at least
[Amit Varma]: piss it off, which the Amadni Party has been very careful about. So therefore, is there
[Amit Varma]: then space for a party as Amadni Party by default seems to have moved towards, to say
[Amit Varma]: that we shall leave ideology aside and not take positions on ideological issues, but
[Amit Varma]: we will simply provide good governance. We are the state capacity party. Is that something
[Amit Varma]: that is then likely to resonate with the people across ideological backgrounds to say ki yeh
[Amit Varma]: sab toh theek hai, ideology apni jaga hai, but mera Bijli Paani Sarak kaise ho raha hai?
[Guest]: I think yes and no. And this is the problem with all these sorts of questions. I think
[Guest]: yes, but there are limits to it. That certain things can only be done by a greater balance
[Guest]: between state market and society. And that is an ideological position. If you don't have
[Guest]: a view on that, the question you're asking is, is it possible to efficiently do public
[Guest]: administration despite whatever view you may have of public administration's role in the
[Guest]: larger picture? And I think the answer is no. But if you didn't ask the second half
[Guest]: of the question, the answer could be yes. Yes, you can make public administration better.
[Guest]: I'll give you an example. You can improve the public schools and maybe even the universities,
[Guest]: but increasingly there's a sense among employers that school and university are not preparing
[Guest]: young people for the world of employment and entrepreneurship. And there are even people
[Guest]: like Muhammad Yunus who are now saying, who really wants to get a job? Most people want
[Guest]: to be self-employed. So this notion of preparing large masses of people to be employed by others
[Guest]: is itself a daft idea. So if you take all of those ideas together, you could say that
[Guest]: among the better off sections of society, there is willingness to consider alternatives
[Guest]: to traditional ways of empowering yourself for life. And that we are now embarked on
[Guest]: a journey of pushing the masses into a model that we are ourselves preparing to exit from.
[Guest]: And a lot of things in society are like that, that essentially people seek empowerment by
[Guest]: exiting from the model that applies to the majority. But they also argue that that majority
[Guest]: model is necessary to empower the majority. And I think there's a risk of that. One could
[Guest]: argue that provisioning public services by paying for them is in fact better than trying
[Guest]: to provide them yourself. But if you're not going to provision them, should you be working
[Guest]: harder at providing them? Yes. And you could argue that that's really what Manish and others
[Guest]: have been doing with the education system in Delhi. But in that process, you don't get
[Guest]: to ask the question of whether provisioning is better than providing. You're only asking
[Guest]: the question, can you provide better? And perhaps the answer is yes to that. But it
[Guest]: doesn't answer the ideological question. It doesn't provide clarity on whether it could
[Guest]: be faster if you provisioned it. It could be faster if you accepted many more things
[Guest]: as education. It could be faster if you did away with the chop-up. I'll give you an example.
[Guest]: I met someone at Rashtrapati Bhawan about, I'm going to say three, four years ago, maybe.
[Guest]: And it was after some discussion and he came up to me and he said, I'm the new chairman
[Guest]: of AICTE. And he's a well-regarded gentleman. I later understood that he had done some interesting
[Guest]: and important work in Pune. And I said, sir, I don't want to get off on the wrong foot
[Guest]: with you. So, I will sort of tell you, in my opinion, AICTE has outlived its usefulness
[Guest]: and by and large would be better off if we just shut the thing down. He didn't take offense
[Guest]: and sort of engaged in a conversation about that. And some things have been done even
[Guest]: in AICTE and UGC, which are improvements on past things. But fundamentally, we have reached
[Guest]: the point that even well-meaning people who are willing to look at administrative reform
[Guest]: may not achieve the acceleration of development that India needs because the scope for that
[Guest]: kind of acceleration to produce, that kind of work to produce development is itself slow.
[Guest]: And I talk about this in decentralization terms sometimes. If the center spends money,
[Guest]: the economy will broadly grow at 4% a year. If some of that money is shifted to the states
[Guest]: and there's equal sharing between the center and the states, the economy will grow at 6%
[Guest]: a year. If even more money is pushed down to the municipalities and the panchayats,
[Guest]: the country will grow at 8% a year. This is my thumb rule for why we need to decentralize
[Guest]: public expenditure. If we did this with the same monies that are currently available,
[Guest]: the problem today with the slowdown, in my view, is not that there isn't money, but most
[Guest]: of the expenditure is happening in layers of government that are slow to spend that
[Guest]: money. And on the private sector side, we've been giving incentives to people who have
[Guest]: the ability to park money rather than giving breaks to people who will not park money and
[Guest]: will actually use it to drive demand. If you give the money to the upper half of the economy,
[Guest]: they can park the money. They don't really need to do anything with it. If you give the
[Guest]: same money through GST breaks and other breaks to the lower half of the economy, it drives
[Guest]: consumption, right? Same thing with public expenditure as an accountable thing. The sarkar
[Guest]: is already spending on the schools. If the schools are not of good quality, you go and
[Guest]: spend additional money sending your child to a private school. It's duplication of cost
[Guest]: and wasteful in some sense. This pure economic sense, it's wasteful. It's money being spent
[Guest]: twice to achieve an outcome. Whereas if you make the first expenditure work properly,
[Guest]: suddenly there's a wealth of capital available to do a whole bunch of other things in the
[Guest]: local economy. So I think we need to think of money and the economy in two ways. We need
[Guest]: to think of the velocity of money at different levels of public expenditure, and we also
[Guest]: need to think of the velocity of money in the hands of different people. And I've sort
[Guest]: of come to the conclusion that monies with local governments and monies with the working
[Guest]: poor are much more likely to turn the economic situation around rather than all the other
[Guest]: things that get talked about. You know, you can meet industry experts and ask them what
[Guest]: should be done. You're not going to get anywhere near the answer.
[Amit Varma]: That's an absolutely fantastic insight. And I'll go back to the ideological question for
[Amit Varma]: a brief moment for a two-part question. Part one is that when you talk about correcting
[Amit Varma]: the balance between state market society, what you essentially mean is because the direction
[Amit Varma]: that our early leaders set us in tilted that balance too much towards a state with very
[Amit Varma]: little power for society. Correcting that balance, therefore, means empowering civil
[Amit Varma]: society, right? And even the private sector, because the state is too much of it. Part
[Amit Varma]: two then is that ideologically, and this is a two-part thing, and again, two parts within
[Amit Varma]: the second part, where, you know, not to speak of the ARP specifically, but that illustration
[Amit Varma]: comes up. And part one is, at a broader philosophical level, once you hold the reins of government,
[Amit Varma]: aren't your incentives and therefore your inclinations likely to be towards maintaining
[Amit Varma]: the power of the state or strengthening it? That's part one. And part two is that from
[Amit Varma]: what I hear, and this is anecdotal, whatever good work ARP may have done in the field of
[Amit Varma]: public education, they have been very distrustful of private education and their policies are
[Amit Varma]: harming budget private schools. In some cases, I've heard specific instances of where their
[Amit Varma]: ideological insistence on fee caps are making specific schools shut down.
[Guest]: Absolutely. But this is what I said, that when you asked the question about public administration,
[Guest]: I said there are limits that improving providing can only take you so far. Then you have to
[Guest]: have a view about provisioning. You understand? Now, provisioning can mean I pay, you deliver,
[Guest]: or you are anyway delivering and somebody is paying, I don't interfere, but it can be
[Guest]: anything. But I'm saying that there is a worldview that is required about provisioning. And maybe
[Guest]: one of the political compulsions is that you have an electorate that comes to you and say,
[Guest]: this provisioner, or the guy who's doing the providing in the provisioning, discipline
[Guest]: him. The problem is not actually unmanageable, but it is only manageable with transparent
[Guest]: data. For example, if you take, let me take any instance, education is a good example.
[Guest]: If you do the math on what it takes to create a space, construct on it, and deliver reasonable
[Guest]: quality education to a few hundred students in a single space, you can't come up with
[Guest]: a number that is less than $50,000 a year or $60,000 a year. You can't. Now, most governments,
[Guest]: by and large governments don't accept this. The governments think that it can be done
[Guest]: for $10,000 or $12,000. The RTE compensation rates in most states are in that range. But
[Guest]: the government's view is we are only spending that much on our own schools. Yeah, but what
[Guest]: are your schools delivering? And why aren't you spending more? The real question that
[Guest]: we should ask about public education is, why are we not spending 50? I actually don't want
[Guest]: to get into the private education question too early either. But I'm saying, why don't
[Guest]: we spend 60,000 rupees per child in the public education system? First, frankly, any amount
[Guest]: of excess, quote unquote, charging by anybody will get disciplined by that, number one.
[Guest]: Second, you have to sort of ensure that your proposal for education reform is not promising
[Guest]: things in the future that aren't available in the present. Kids need to be educated today.
[Guest]: That if you create a system that will reform itself in 15 years, you're leaving behind
[Guest]: a whole generation that needs to be educated as well. My thing is that we are going to
[Guest]: go through this battle of, because we do not acknowledge the true cost of public goods
[Guest]: in the public sector, there is a tendency to think that there is overpricing in the
[Guest]: private sector. But if you delivered quality by spending what is necessary in the public
[Guest]: sector, you will come to a different understanding of what is going on in the private sector.
[Amit Varma]: And my other sort of response to that would also be that even if we are to accept that
[Amit Varma]: the private sector is charging too much, nevertheless, no one is saying that you allow them to operate
[Amit Varma]: and you shut down entirely. You do what you do in public education, but let the private
[Amit Varma]: sector also do whatever it does so that parents can choose. And if then parents choose a private
[Amit Varma]: sector over your public education, which is free, then that itself will be a signal over
[Guest]: the problem.
[Guest]: I agree. But the problem is that will take a while before your public education is adequate
[Guest]: enough to offer a genuine alternative to all the people who currently choose the private
[Amit Varma]: sector is a 10-year job.
[Amit Varma]: No, sure. But what I'm saying is what is not a 10-year job, what could be done immediately
[Amit Varma]: except of course, a political economy won't let it happen immediately, is that you let
[Amit Varma]: the private sector function without any restraints and empower the parents with choice. If the
[Amit Varma]: parents nevertheless make that choice that I will spend so much money to send my kid
[Amit Varma]: to a private school instead of a public school, then that's fair enough. They deserve to at
[Amit Varma]: least have that choice. By taking that choice away, you are doing a disservice to civil
[Amit Varma]: society at large. And you know, when I speak for empowering the private sector by just
[Amit Varma]: allowing them to exist, people often think of it as a binary that no, you want government
[Amit Varma]: schools to shut down, which is not the case at all. Let the government do whatever it
[Amit Varma]: is with public schools, but let the private sector operate, but you don't do that.
[Guest]: Yeah, there is room for that. I think Punjab government is looking at some of this, partly
[Guest]: because of what they hear from across the border in Pakistan trying this thing in a
[Guest]: larger scale. There are countries around the world that have experimented with this. Even
[Guest]: cities in America have experimented with school vouchers and things like that. There is a
[Guest]: way to allow and create both. But I think it will always be true that the substantial
[Guest]: responsibility for mass education will be on the state. And that currently, we simply
[Guest]: do not spend enough per child in any state, including in Delhi. I think there's room to
[Guest]: spend even more per child to prepare them. I mean, Delhi is way above everybody else.
[Guest]: But even in Delhi, you'll need to spend more per child to be at globally competitive levels
[Guest]: of foundations for young people. In other states, it's a disaster. I mean, and there's
[Guest]: also fudging. I'll give you an example. So if you see the SSLC results or whatever, PUC
[Guest]: results in Karnataka or in any other state, they'll say 67% past percentage, 70% past
[Guest]: percentage kind of thing. And then if you look at it, what it really means is there
[Guest]: also 700,000 kids took the exam and about 450,000 or so passed. But that kind of thing
[Guest]: doesn't ask the question, how many kids should have taken the exam? How many kids are there?
[Guest]: Of school-leaving age, who should have taken the exam? And that's another 400,000 to 500,000
[Guest]: kids. So effectively, the graduation rates in most states for those children who you
[Guest]: would think of as being traditionally served by the public education system is about 35%.
[Guest]: So you have a situation where one out of three children is graduating from school and two
[Guest]: out of three are not. And this is a disaster. Most people don't see the data well enough
[Guest]: to understand this nuance. And also, we seem to be going on a certain trajectory, which
[Guest]: is delusional. I'll tell you what the delusion is. The delusion is that without widespread
[Guest]: access to learning for the majority of the population, you can become a developed nation.
[Guest]: This is the delusion that's playing out. Somehow, India will become a superpower. And after
[Guest]: that, we will educate the majority. We've got the sequencing wrong. It is only when
[Guest]: you educate the majority that you can get anywhere close to being a global power. Ultimately,
[Guest]: the capacity that a country projects externally has to first exist inside the country. And
[Guest]: we have not given ourselves enough room for that, enough opportunity for that capacity
[Guest]: to be the collective capacity of the majority. Too many people are just left behind and therefore
[Guest]: do not get to levels of learning and productivity and just life-enriching work that we are not
[Guest]: able to project their capacity externally either.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely agreed. That's a good point. And I would just add and say that we should not
[Amit Varma]: only educate the majority, but we should at least allow the majority to educate itself
[Guest]: if we are not doing that, which is also not the case for ideological reasons.
[Guest]: I would say a different view, but the schools are not where I would go and apply this thinking.
[Guest]: I would first say, get rid of this chapa that is being given by the boards through the schools.
[Guest]: Let anybody, you have a standardized test, let anybody who takes that standardized test
[Guest]: be eligible to get the necessary certification. And it is none of your business, whether the
[Guest]: institution that takes them to that point is a school, organized as a school, or organized
[Guest]: as a learning center of a different type that works well. And I'll tell you why this is
[Guest]: important. And this is part of some of the work that I've been doing more recently as
[Guest]: well. There are certain things. So let's say you wanted to become a violinist, or you wanted
[Guest]: to become a soccer player or a cricket player. School is fundamentally in the way. The notion
[Guest]: that school and college is the way to succeed is already not true for large numbers of people,
[Guest]: even when they go to a good school, because their passion in life has nothing to do with
[Guest]: learning chemistry and physics. You could argue that physics and chemistry have something
[Guest]: to add to everybody, but not at the scale at which they're required to learn it if they're
[Guest]: trying to be a cricketer or a violinist, number one. Second, not all schools teach these things
[Guest]: well anyway. So now by forcing, in fact, the majority of schools don't teach these things
[Guest]: well. So now you're taking kids who are looking for some, so even if after you force them
[Guest]: through the system, you have employees telling you that, well, you may have forced them through
[Guest]: the system. I don't need to acknowledge that in any way. I remember a conversation with
[Guest]: someone that I hired a few years ago, in which we were having a meal together and I asked
[Guest]: him a few questions about him and where he came from, what led to his employment with
[Guest]: me and all of that. And then at some point he said, so you're asking all these questions
[Guest]: as though you had not looked at my resume when you hired me. And I said, yeah, that's
[Guest]: probably true. I didn't look at your resume when I hired you. You wanted a job. I asked
[Guest]: somebody in the company to check out what you could do and to give you a role that is
[Guest]: commensurate with what you could do and compensation that is commensurate with what you could do.
[Guest]: I think everybody deserves a chance. I mean, you have to re-imagine the university. You
[Guest]: have to say, what if everybody could go to college? You eliminate this entrance exam
[Guest]: and you say anyone can go to college equivalent learning. Some people may do it in three years.
[Guest]: Some people may do it in 23 years. That is nobody's business. But I think the real problem
[Guest]: today in the education system is examination and certification through institutions, right?
[Guest]: If you remove this examination, so supposing you are in ninth standard today and you wanted
[Guest]: to go and pursue a career in something that isn't doable in school because school doesn't
[Guest]: offer that. Let's say you want to be a soccer player or a violinist. Now, if you were to
[Guest]: say I spent four hours of my day preparing to be bad, your parents and everybody else
[Guest]: around you have a fundamental worry. Will my child go to college? Great. I think that's
[Guest]: a silly thing to ask whether a child who is pursuing his passion is going to be allowed
[Guest]: to go to a learning institution. It defies every meaning of the phrase learning institution.
[Guest]: You should be able to say that somebody who wants to be a soccer player, we should re-imagine
[Guest]: the learning institution to teach them the things that matter the most to a soccer player
[Guest]: and to put a university chap or a high school diploma on top of that if necessary. Once
[Guest]: you re-imagine what the thing that you call certification is, you'll close the gap. And
[Guest]: my professor was telling me a few weeks ago that in India, you have the largest gap between
[Guest]: certification and learning anywhere in the world. But when somebody says I've got this
[Guest]: degree, I don't think anybody attributes any meaning to that. And if you want to close
[Guest]: that, you have to actually say people who deliver the outcomes that parents want, that
[Guest]: children want, but even public systems want. People who deliver the outcomes should have
[Guest]: with that the authority to put the chapa on that outcome.
[Amit Varma]: These are very wise words. And it also add that this re-imagining of education as it
[Amit Varma]: were, which is badly needed, is far more likely to come from society with from hordes of problem
[Amit Varma]: solving people rather than the ossified state. But let's not go down that rabbit hole of
[Amit Varma]: education right now. I've had episodes on this, which are linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: Let's get back to the fundamental subject of this episode, which is participatory democracy
[Amit Varma]: and government by the people. Like you've also written an article, which we'll link
[Amit Varma]: to in the show notes on your website, where you talk about how in the past, the conventional
[Amit Varma]: view of government has been government of the people and for the people. And what is
[Amit Varma]: now happening, which ties in with your idea of the good Indian who is engaged in actually
[Amit Varma]: participating is government by the people. Elaborate on what this involves.
[Guest]: So most people have heard Abraham Lincoln's phrase. I won't say the speech. Most people
[Guest]: only know the phrase from the closing line of his Gettysburg Address that, you know,
[Guest]: government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish from the face
[Guest]: of the earth. They haven't heard that last part either very much. But they've heard this
[Guest]: phrase together, of the people, for the people, by the people. And they have a sense that
[Guest]: together, all three have something to do with democracy. But very few people have thought
[Guest]: about what does each part of that mean independently? What does for the people mean? What does of
[Guest]: the people mean? And most importantly, what does by the people mean? I don't think anybody
[Guest]: has actually thought about it very much in that way. And I think that's the problem.
[Guest]: Because if you ask yourself what government by the people is, you might come to some understanding
[Guest]: of public problem solving, in which you see from the outset, both a right and a responsibility
[Guest]: for you to be in participatory mode, right? It is really the question of what can you
[Guest]: yourself do? Can you imagine self-government before government? And most people imagine
[Guest]: government, but they don't imagine self-government. They go straight away to imagining government.
[Guest]: What are the things that you can yourself do? And why would you go and ask a government
[Guest]: to do the things that you can yourself do? If you begin with that, I feel you can go
[Guest]: a lot further. And it also means that when you can yourself do some things, your ability
[Guest]: to go and ask an official or an elected representative to do more than that is possible. But if you
[Guest]: do nothing, then he or she can also do the barest minimum. Because you're doing nothing,
[Guest]: then even the barest minimum is more than what you are doing. By elevating what you
[Guest]: do, you force the elected, the paid person to do even more. Because if you can do all
[Guest]: this with nothing, why should you be paying them? You can put that question front and
[Guest]: center.
[Guest]: So I feel there is both a practical and a responsible approach to this whole thing,
[Guest]: which can elevate the game. And like I told you, it's about velocity. If you want to improve
[Guest]: 400 public spaces in the city, the fastest way to do it is to get local communities involved.
[Guest]: If you really want to do things at scale, it's really to get communities involved and
[Guest]: let them do it. Communities, of course, have the risk of potential discrimination among
[Guest]: themselves and all of that stuff. And the state must be a guardian of equality. But
[Guest]: I want to use this opportunity to go back to something else. The freedom movement in
[Guest]: India, we sort of think of it as the independence movement and the freedom movement. But I think
[Guest]: a very large part of it, keep in mind the Government of India Act existed in the 1930s.
[Guest]: A very large part of it was actually about self-rule. And this is important in the Indian
[Guest]: context. And I'll tell you why. In the Constitution, a lot of things are enshrined really well.
[Guest]: And the state potentially could be an important guardian of many things enshrined in the Constitution.
[Guest]: But there is one thing that is not sufficiently enshrined in the Constitution. And that is
[Guest]: the idea of equality. It's not that the Constitution is meant for unequal persons. Of course, it
[Guest]: is dispremised on the notion that it's about equality, one person, one vote, non-discrimination.
[Guest]: All these clauses come from some understanding about equality. But the underlying tenets
[Guest]: of that equality, what in the American Constitution was ascribed as life, liberty, and the pursuit
[Guest]: of happiness. Now, if you were to ask the average Indian citizen, what is your view
[Guest]: of liberty, right? You would get a very odd look, by and large. But the notion that democracy
[Guest]: is partly for the protection of liberty is not widely understood. And that's partly because
[Guest]: of how democracy came to India. Democracy came to India by ousting a colonial power
[Guest]: and replacing that with self-rule. And subsequently, various things have been added to it.
[Amit Varma]: But the self very quickly defined as a state in this instance.
[Guest]: Exactly, exactly. Which is why the Police Act is from 1861. And many other laws have
[Guest]: similar problems. But to come back to what I was saying, whereas in European society,
[Guest]: maybe even in the Americas and a few other places, not everywhere, the notion that democracy
[Guest]: is necessary for the protection of people's liberties is much more of a factor. And the
[Guest]: notion that those liberties, what in the American Constitution is written as inalienable rights,
[Guest]: the notion that this liberty cannot be constrained even by the state, right, is not there in
[Guest]: our Constitution. In fact, the Constitution contains many, many instances of things of
[Guest]: liberties that can be constrained by the state, provided for public order, for maintaining
[Amit Varma]: harmony between communities, for whatever. Like the First Amendment restrictions on the
[Guest]: right to free speech, for example. Exactly. So in a sense, because the starting
[Guest]: point, the starting point itself is imagined as good public administration and legitimate
[Guest]: public administration. Good and legitimate are the starting points from which the Constitution
[Guest]: presents itself. And public is presented in a fair way as equal, similar, and all of that
[Guest]: stuff. But really, this notion of liberty, equality... Well, fraternity may be a different
[Guest]: thing in our context, but liberty and equality. I think we would benefit from examining the
[Guest]: relationship between the language of the Constitution, liberty in particular and liberty and equality.
[Guest]: And that's one part of what I think is a problem. The other is how the Constitution was written.
[Guest]: At the time of the formation of India, once the British left, there was a necessity that
[Guest]: various territories run by this prince or that prince, this whatever, various kinds
[Guest]: of people, needed to be converged together into one national identity and a national
[Guest]: purpose forged out of that. And if you look at the Constituent Assembly debates, it would
[Guest]: seem to you that people from the constituent regions were willing to give the center the
[Guest]: necessary power to achieve this. But once that had been exercised, the return of those
[Guest]: powers to the constituent federating states didn't happen at all.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I did an episode with a historian, Gyan Prakash, about the emergency based on
[Amit Varma]: his book, Emergency Chronicles, which recently won the Ram Nath Goenka Award, where his central
[Amit Varma]: thesis was that, look, Indira Gandhi didn't do anything illegal. All the powers she used
[Amit Varma]: to call the emergency were actually written into the Constitution, because at the time
[Amit Varma]: the framers of the Constitution sat in that closed room in Delhi framing the Constitution,
[Amit Varma]: there was violence erupting across the country, and therefore the instinct to centralize.
[Amit Varma]: And once you do that, power once given can never be taken away.
[Guest]: Well, it can, but I'm saying it's very hard. It's hard, but you also need a Thatcherite
[Guest]: moment or a Reaganite moment. But the person who comes to power, and really, you can see
[Guest]: even Lakshattara in that way, that the person who comes to power has to come to power with
[Guest]: partly the agenda of returning power to the people. But if you come to power to merely
[Guest]: exercise that power, but not to distribute it fairly among state market and society,
[Guest]: then you'll never give it up. And that's the problem. And the reason you need term limits,
[Guest]: if you ask me, is that by... Term limits are a way of inviting participation in this power
[Guest]: dealing exercise from outside of conventional sarkar as well. That's why in countries with
[Guest]: term limits, a lot of people come into public life from non-traditional political backgrounds.
[Guest]: And that's what it is. You have to come to power to decentralize. And if you come to
[Guest]: power to decentralize, you can do a lot of these things. I mean, even... I haven't studied
[Guest]: this well enough, but you could easily say that a state government, like including the
[Guest]: one in Delhi, should be able to fund ward committees directly. The ward committees are
[Guest]: required by law. The fact that they have not been set up by MCD and made operational doesn't
[Guest]: mean that they should not be funded. I remember a conversation in the State Finance Commission
[Guest]: in Karnataka. According to the 74th Amendment, there should be a Metropolitan Planning Committee,
[Guest]: which does most of the planning for the city of Bangalore and even a few other cities.
[Guest]: The MPC doesn't exist in any meaningful way. And the functions that were allocated by the
[Guest]: 74th Amendment to the MPC continue to remain substantially with the state government. But
[Guest]: the State Finance Commission has a responsibility only to assign monies to different levels
[Guest]: of government. Its job is not to say, because the state government has not created metropolitan
[Guest]: governance, I'm not going to assign any money to metropolitan governance. So I argued in
[Guest]: the Finance Commission that you assign the money to metropolitan government anyway. The
[Guest]: politicians will follow the money and create the necessary MPC for that. What has happened
[Guest]: is that when one branch of the government does something that is, quote-unquote, incorrect
[Guest]: in some way, there's a tendency for other branches to align with that incorrect course,
[Guest]: rather than pull it back. And this is a courtesy they extend each other. And this is why the
[Guest]: courts are biased against citizens.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating. So, you know, you've been trying to push participatory democracy, both at an
[Amit Varma]: initial level, as a civil activist, and then in politics itself with the Lok Satta Party
[Amit Varma]: and now with the Aam Aadmi Party. And now you're also, you've been involved for a few
[Amit Varma]: years with urban governance in Bangalore. Tell me a little bit about that journey in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that, fine, you've gotten into it with a lot of idealism. But has that been
[Amit Varma]: tempered or strengthened by the obstacles you face? What are the kind of obstacles you
[Amit Varma]: face? And have you ever thought of just giving it up and, you know, going back to the sort
[Amit Varma]: of profit-making sector and, you know, watching stars?
[Guest]: Yeah, you could do stuff like that. I actually think I have benefited from a certain attitude.
[Guest]: The things that I want to do in public life for urban governance, or for anything, I don't
[Guest]: mind if I fail. I don't think I'm defined by that. I think it is necessary to take,
[Guest]: I'll give you, again, going back to 1905. I like going back to 1905, because a certain
[Guest]: set of questions were different at that time. Would you say that Gopal Krishna Gokhale failed?
[Guest]: Because in his time, he did not live to see independence. Now, could you argue that he
[Guest]: failed? Right? I would not argue that he failed. But I would even argue that he did some things
[Guest]: that were phenomenally important for subsequent efforts at independence to materialize. And
[Guest]: he also did one other thing, which I find interesting. He set up one of the earliest
[Guest]: NGOs in India, and he called it the Servants of India Society. I find both of those things
[Guest]: fascinating, because I think they are a reminder of a few things. First, that your responsibility,
[Guest]: I don't want to call it karma, because I don't know that I understand that well enough. But
[Guest]: your responsibility is to do what you should do in your time and space, because you have
[Guest]: benefited from what others did in their time and space previously. That's all.
[Amit Varma]: That's a beautiful thought.
[Guest]: That's all. I have benefited from the Gokhale's and the Gandhi's and whoever else. And therefore,
[Guest]: it is contingent on me to do things as well. Number one, you need not succeed. But you
[Guest]: must try. You need not succeed, you must try. And you should certainly not become married
[Guest]: to success. You should be willing to say, if I fail, that is not the definition of me.
[Guest]: But I do many things in life. I pursue many goals. This is one of them. This is an important
[Guest]: goal for which I should give time and effort. If I succeed, great. If I have to keep trying
[Guest]: till I can't try anymore, that's also okay. But I think it's not, but you have to do it
[Guest]: not as indifference to the outcome. You can always say, I mean, it is what it is. I don't
[Guest]: think it's indifference. I think you should, you know, in a detached sense, see that the
[Guest]: journey is important, and that you are not that important.
[Amit Varma]: This is in fact, a lesson I've got from both professional poker, which I played for a few
[Amit Varma]: years, and the Bhagavad Gita that you can't be results oriented, just do the right thing
[Amit Varma]: and whatever happens, happens. I've taken a lot of your time and effort for this episode.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll sort of end by asking, as usual, a two part question, which is that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you've lived through and actually been a participant in this momentary shift of what you describe
[Amit Varma]: as the conception of the good Indian to being someone who is actively engaged in civic affairs
[Amit Varma]: and in politics and so on. And, you know, one work in progress, which is an example
[Amit Varma]: of that playing out is the Aam Aadmi Party. But also, I would say that an illustration
[Amit Varma]: of that is all the movements across the country that have spontaneously sprung up in protest
[Amit Varma]: against the CIA and so on. There are many, perhaps manifestations where people are involving
[Amit Varma]: themselves in politics defined broadly. So looking ahead, say for the next 15-20 years,
[Amit Varma]: what is the best case scenario and the worst case scenario for our great nation?
[Guest]: The best case scenario is that we embrace both decentralization and federalism. And
[Guest]: but we do it in a responsible way, not in anger against the center, but in a way that
[Guest]: recognizes that the center is the collective strength of our federating entities, and that
[Guest]: it has its own role to play. That's the best case scenario, that we come to that understanding
[Guest]: as a people, as a population, as a citizenry in some ways. The worst case scenario is that
[Guest]: we miss that bus. And India is a land of what JP used to call avoidable suffering. You know
[Guest]: what I mean?
[Guest]: That's a great phrase.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, if we do nothing, 15 more million children will go uneducated this year. And
[Guest]: those numbers are staggering. We live among the largest concentrations of poor people
[Guest]: in the history of the planet in India. If we do nothing, 15 million people will go without
[Guest]: education. If we do nothing, six and a half million of them will go without healthcare.
[Guest]: If we do nothing, all sorts of bad things will happen to very, very large numbers of
[Guest]: people. 60% of the people who are coming out of poverty tend to fall back into it already.
[Guest]: If we do nothing, we are already at some of the lowest and high unemployment rates in
[Guest]: recent times. I feel, I mean, highest unemployment rates in recent times. But what I'm trying
[Guest]: to say is that the cost of doing nothing to correct course is very, very high. And a lot
[Guest]: of the things that we see on the streets as anger are really... But CAA is a different
[Guest]: country. In general, a lot of the anger that we see in protest movements are really fear
[Guest]: and anxiety about the future among a very large section of the population that feels
[Guest]: that no one is looking out for them. I think it's important. Gandhiji used to say, and
[Guest]: I'll probably end with this. Gandhiji used to say, and in EF Schumacher's book, Small
[Guest]: is Beautiful, he sort of mentioned this as well quite prominently, that your education
[Guest]: is not a passport to privilege. It's a badge of public service. The measure of whether
[Guest]: you are well-educated is what you have done with it for the benefit of large numbers of
[Guest]: people, or at least for the benefit for the wider society in some way. And I think it
[Guest]: sort of behooves all of us to make some effort at it. I've been fortunate in one way, I think.
[Guest]: I feel like I'm fortunate to stumble on what I now call small is bountiful, not just small
[Guest]: is beautiful. And that is the belief that there is a way of imagining government by
[Guest]: the people, which allows for the cumulative energies of lots of people trying lots of
[Guest]: things together in purposeful ways, despite differences, maybe in diverse ways. And the
[Guest]: learning that it provides and the opportunity for accelerated development that it provides
[Guest]: is the thing that we can perpetually bet on and not keep coming to conflicts again and
[Guest]: again.
[Guest]: I feel that if I'm able to think through and create first for myself and possibly for a
[Guest]: few others, such a way of living and such a way of thinking about this, I'm quite happy
[Guest]: to say that's really what I wanted to do in public life. And the rest of what I do is
[Amit Varma]: what I do.
[Amit Varma]: Ashwin, thanks a lot for coming in on the scene in the unseen. Every time I have a conversation
[Guest]: with you, I feel like my brain just expanded.
[Guest]: Thank you. It's very kind of you to say that. I'm happy to have come on the show. I'm really,
[Guest]: I mean, I realize that you've built a very interesting audience for ideas, which is necessary
[Guest]: space as well. And I hope one day there will be many such spaces in India.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do check out the links in the show notes and
[Amit Varma]: head on over to AshwinMahesh.com for more about Ashwin and his work. You can follow
[Amit Varma]: him on Twitter at Ashwin Mahesh. You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can
[Amit Varma]: browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkragati.com. The
[Amit Varma]: Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution. You can find out more about the
[Amit Varma]: public policy courses at takshashila.org.in. Thank you for listening.